Chapter XIV

At the Mercy of the Jungle


After Clayton had plunged into the jungle, the sailors--mutineers of
the Arrow--fell into a discussion of their next step; but on one point
all were agreed--that they should hasten to put off to the anchored
Arrow, where they could at least be safe from the spears of their
unseen foe.  And so, while Jane Porter and Esmeralda were barricading
themselves within the cabin, the cowardly crew of cutthroats were
pulling rapidly for their ship in the two boats that had brought them
ashore.

So much had Tarzan seen that day that his head was in a whirl of
wonder.  But the most wonderful sight of all, to him, was the face of
the beautiful white girl.

Here at last was one of his own kind; of that he was positive.  And the
young man and the two old men; they, too, were much as he had pictured
his own people to be.

But doubtless they were as ferocious and cruel as other men he had
seen.  The fact that they alone of all the party were unarmed might
account for the fact that they had killed no one.  They might be very
different if provided with weapons.

Tarzan had seen the young man pick up the fallen revolver of the
wounded Snipes and hide it away in his breast; and he had also seen him
slip it cautiously to the girl as she entered the cabin door.

He did not understand anything of the motives behind all that he had
seen; but, somehow, intuitively he liked the young man and the two old
men, and for the girl he had a strange longing which he scarcely
understood.  As for the big black woman, she was evidently connected in
some way to the girl, and so he liked her, also.

For the sailors, and especially Snipes, he had developed a great
hatred.  He knew by their threatening gestures and by the expression
upon their evil faces that they were enemies of the others of the
party, and so he decided to watch closely.

Tarzan wondered why the men had gone into the jungle, nor did it ever
occur to him that one could become lost in that maze of undergrowth
which to him was as simple as is the main street of your own home town
to you.

When he saw the sailors row away toward the ship, and knew that the
girl and her companion were safe in his cabin, Tarzan decided to follow
the young man into the jungle and learn what his errand might be.  He
swung off rapidly in the direction taken by Clayton, and in a short
time heard faintly in the distance the now only occasional calls of the
Englishman to his friends.

Presently Tarzan came up with the white man, who, almost fagged, was
leaning against a tree wiping the perspiration from his forehead.  The
ape-man, hiding safe behind a screen of foliage, sat watching this new
specimen of his own race intently.

At intervals Clayton called aloud and finally it came to Tarzan that he
was searching for the old man.

Tarzan was on the point of going off to look for them himself, when he
caught the yellow glint of a sleek hide moving cautiously through the
jungle toward Clayton.

It was Sheeta, the leopard.  Now, Tarzan heard the soft bending of
grasses and wondered why the young white man was not warned.  Could it
be he had failed to note the loud warning?  Never before had Tarzan
known Sheeta to be so clumsy.

No, the white man did not hear.  Sheeta was crouching for the spring,
and then, shrill and horrible, there rose from the stillness of the
jungle the awful cry of the challenging ape, and Sheeta turned,
crashing into the underbrush.

Clayton came to his feet with a start.  His blood ran cold.  Never in
all his life had so fearful a sound smote upon his ears.  He was no
coward; but if ever man felt the icy fingers of fear upon his heart,
William Cecil Clayton, eldest son of Lord Greystoke of England, did
that day in the fastness of the African jungle.

The noise of some great body crashing through the underbrush so close
beside him, and the sound of that bloodcurdling shriek from above,
tested Clayton's courage to the limit; but he could not know that it
was to that very voice he owed his life, nor that the creature who
hurled it forth was his own cousin--the real Lord Greystoke.

The afternoon was drawing to a close, and Clayton, disheartened and
discouraged, was in a terrible quandary as to the proper course to
pursue; whether to keep on in search of Professor Porter, at the almost
certain risk of his own death in the jungle by night, or to return to
the cabin where he might at least serve to protect Jane from the perils
which confronted her on all sides.

He did not wish to return to camp without her father; still more, he
shrank from the thought of leaving her alone and unprotected in the
hands of the mutineers of the Arrow, or to the hundred unknown dangers
of the jungle.

Possibly, too, he thought, the professor and Philander might have
returned to camp.  Yes, that was more than likely.  At least he would
return and see, before he continued what seemed to be a most fruitless
quest.  And so he started, stumbling back through the thick and matted
underbrush in the direction that he thought the cabin lay.

To Tarzan's surprise the young man was heading further into the jungle
in the general direction of Mbonga's village, and the shrewd young
ape-man was convinced that he was lost.

To Tarzan this was scarcely comprehensible; his judgment told him
that no man would venture toward the village of the cruel blacks armed
only with a spear which, from the awkward way in which he carried it,
was evidently an unaccustomed weapon to this white man.  Nor was he
following the trail of the old men.  That, they had crossed and left
long since, though it had been fresh and plain before Tarzan's eyes.

Tarzan was perplexed.  The fierce jungle would make easy prey of this
unprotected stranger in a very short time if he were not guided quickly
to the beach.

Yes, there was Numa, the lion, even now, stalking the white man a dozen
paces to the right.

Clayton heard the great body paralleling his course, and now there rose
upon the evening air the beast's thunderous roar.  The man stopped with
upraised spear and faced the brush from which issued the awful sound.
The shadows were deepening, darkness was settling in.

God!  To die here alone, beneath the fangs of wild beasts; to be torn
and rended; to feel the hot breath of the brute on his face as the
great paw crushed down upon his breast!

For a moment all was still.  Clayton stood rigid, with raised spear.
Presently a faint rustling of the bush apprised him of the stealthy
creeping of the thing behind.  It was gathering for the spring.  At
last he saw it, not twenty feet away--the long, lithe, muscular body
and tawny head of a huge black-maned lion.

The beast was upon its belly, moving forward very slowly.  As its eyes
met Clayton's it stopped, and deliberately, cautiously gathered its
hind quarters behind it.

In agony the man watched, fearful to launch his spear, powerless to fly.

He heard a noise in the tree above him.  Some new danger, he thought,
but he dared not take his eyes from the yellow green orbs before him.
There was a sharp twang as of a broken banjo-string, and at the same
instant an arrow appeared in the yellow hide of the crouching lion.

With a roar of pain and anger the beast sprang; but, somehow, Clayton
stumbled to one side, and as he turned again to face the infuriated
king of beasts, he was appalled at the sight which confronted him.
Almost simultaneously with the lion's turning to renew the attack a
half-naked giant dropped from the tree above squarely on the brute's
back.

With lightning speed an arm that was banded layers of iron muscle
encircled the huge neck, and the great beast was raised from behind,
roaring and pawing the air--raised as easily as Clayton would have
lifted a pet dog.

The scene he witnessed there in the twilight depths of the African
jungle was burned forever into the Englishman's brain.

The man before him was the embodiment of physical perfection and giant
strength; yet it was not upon these he depended in his battle with the
great cat, for mighty as were his muscles, they were as nothing by
comparison with Numa's.  To his agility, to his brain and to his long
keen knife he owed his supremacy.

His right arm encircled the lion's neck, while the left hand plunged
the knife time and again into the unprotected side behind the left
shoulder.  The infuriated beast, pulled up and backwards until he stood
upon his hind legs, struggled impotently in this unnatural position.

Had the battle been of a few seconds' longer duration the outcome might
have been different, but it was all accomplished so quickly that the
lion had scarce time to recover from the confusion of its surprise ere
it sank lifeless to the ground.

Then the strange figure which had vanquished it stood erect upon the
carcass, and throwing back the wild and handsome head, gave out the
fearsome cry which a few moments earlier had so startled Clayton.

Before him he saw the figure of a young man, naked except for a loin
cloth and a few barbaric ornaments about arms and legs; on the breast a
priceless diamond locket gleaming against a smooth brown skin.

The hunting knife had been returned to its homely sheath, and the man
was gathering up his bow and quiver from where he had tossed them when
he leaped to attack the lion.

Clayton spoke to the stranger in English, thanking him for his brave
rescue and complimenting him on the wondrous strength and dexterity he
had displayed, but the only answer was a steady stare and a faint shrug
of the mighty shoulders, which might betoken either disparagement of
the service rendered, or ignorance of Clayton's language.

When the bow and quiver had been slung to his back the wild man, for
such Clayton now thought him, once more drew his knife and deftly
carved a dozen large strips of meat from the lion's carcass.  Then,
squatting upon his haunches, he proceeded to eat, first motioning
Clayton to join him.

The strong white teeth sank into the raw and dripping flesh in apparent
relish of the meal, but Clayton could not bring himself to share the
uncooked meat with his strange host; instead he watched him, and
presently there dawned upon him the conviction that this was Tarzan of
the Apes, whose notice he had seen posted upon the cabin door that
morning.

If so he must speak English.

Again Clayton attempted speech with the ape-man; but the replies, now
vocal, were in a strange tongue, which resembled the chattering of
monkeys mingled with the growling of some wild beast.

No, this could not be Tarzan of the Apes, for it was very evident that
he was an utter stranger to English.

When Tarzan had completed his repast he rose and, pointing a very
different direction from that which Clayton had been pursuing, started
off through the jungle toward the point he had indicated.

Clayton, bewildered and confused, hesitated to follow him, for he
thought he was but being led more deeply into the mazes of the forest;
but the ape-man, seeing him disinclined to follow, returned, and,
grasping him by the coat, dragged him along until he was convinced that
Clayton understood what was required of him.  Then he left him to
follow voluntarily.

The Englishman, finally concluding that he was a prisoner, saw no
alternative open but to accompany his captor, and thus they traveled
slowly through the jungle while the sable mantle of the impenetrable
forest night fell about them, and the stealthy footfalls of padded paws
mingled with the breaking of twigs and the wild calls of the savage
life that Clayton felt closing in upon him.

Suddenly Clayton heard the faint report of a firearm--a single shot,
and then silence.

In the cabin by the beach two thoroughly terrified women clung to each
other as they crouched upon the low bench in the gathering darkness.

The Negress sobbed hysterically, bemoaning the evil day that had
witnessed her departure from her dear Maryland, while the white girl,
dry eyed and outwardly calm, was torn by inward fears and forebodings.
She feared not more for herself than for the three men whom she knew to
be wandering in the abysmal depths of the savage jungle, from which she
now heard issuing the almost incessant shrieks and roars, barkings and
growlings of its terrifying and fearsome denizens as they sought their
prey.

And now there came the sound of a heavy body brushing against the side
of the cabin.  She could hear the great padded paws upon the ground
outside.  For an instant, all was silence; even the bedlam of the
forest died to a faint murmur.  Then she distinctly heard the beast
outside sniffing at the door, not two feet from where she crouched.
Instinctively the girl shuddered, and shrank closer to the black woman.

"Hush!" she whispered.  "Hush, Esmeralda," for the woman's sobs and
groans seemed to have attracted the thing that stalked there just
beyond the thin wall.

A gentle scratching sound was heard on the door.  The brute tried to
force an entrance; but presently this ceased, and again she heard the
great pads creeping stealthily around the cabin.  Again they
stopped--beneath the window on which the terrified eyes of the girl now
glued themselves.

"God!" she murmured, for now, silhouetted against the moonlit sky
beyond, she saw framed in the tiny square of the latticed window the
head of a huge lioness.  The gleaming eyes were fixed upon her in
intent ferocity.

"Look, Esmeralda!" she whispered.  "For God's sake, what shall we do?
Look!  Quick!  The window!"

Esmeralda, cowering still closer to her mistress, took one frightened
glance toward the little square of moonlight, just as the lioness
emitted a low, savage snarl.

The sight that met the poor woman's eyes was too much for the already
overstrung nerves.

"Oh, Gaberelle!" she shrieked, and slid to the floor an inert and
senseless mass.

For what seemed an eternity the great brute stood with its forepaws
upon the sill, glaring into the little room.  Presently it tried the
strength of the lattice with its great talons.

The girl had almost ceased to breathe, when, to her relief, the head
disappeared and she heard the brute's footsteps leaving the window.
But now they came to the door again, and once more the scratching
commenced; this time with increasing force until the great beast was
tearing at the massive panels in a perfect frenzy of eagerness to seize
its defenseless victims.

Could Jane have known the immense strength of that door, built piece by
piece, she would have felt less fear of the lioness reaching her by
this avenue.

Little did John Clayton imagine when he fashioned that crude but mighty
portal that one day, twenty years later, it would shield a fair
American girl, then unborn, from the teeth and talons of a man-eater.

For fully twenty minutes the brute alternately sniffed and tore at the
door, occasionally giving voice to a wild, savage cry of baffled rage.
At length, however, she gave up the attempt, and Jane heard her
returning toward the window, beneath which she paused for an instant,
and then launched her great weight against the timeworn lattice.

The girl heard the wooden rods groan beneath the impact; but they held,
and the huge body dropped back to the ground below.

Again and again the lioness repeated these tactics, until finally the
horrified prisoner within saw a portion of the lattice give way, and in
an instant one great paw and the head of the animal were thrust within
the room.

Slowly the powerful neck and shoulders spread the bars apart, and the
lithe body protruded farther and farther into the room.

As in a trance, the girl rose, her hand upon her breast, wide eyes
staring horror-stricken into the snarling face of the beast scarce ten
feet from her.  At her feet lay the prostrate form of the Negress.  If
she could but arouse her, their combined efforts might possibly avail
to beat back the fierce and bloodthirsty intruder.

Jane stooped to grasp the black woman by the shoulder.  Roughly she
shook her.

"Esmeralda!  Esmeralda!" she cried.  "Help me, or we are lost."

Esmeralda opened her eyes.  The first object they encountered was the
dripping fangs of the hungry lioness.

With a horrified scream the poor woman rose to her hands and knees, and
in this position scurried across the room, shrieking: "O Gaberelle!  O
Gaberelle!" at the top of her lungs.

Esmeralda weighed some two hundred and eighty pounds, and her extreme
haste, added to her extreme corpulency, produced a most amazing result
when Esmeralda elected to travel on all fours.

For a moment the lioness remained quiet with intense gaze directed upon
the flitting Esmeralda, whose goal appeared to be the cupboard, into
which she attempted to propel her huge bulk; but as the shelves were
but nine or ten inches apart, she only succeeded in getting her head
in; whereupon, with a final screech, which paled the jungle noises into
insignificance, she fainted once again.

With the subsidence of Esmeralda the lioness renewed her efforts to
wriggle her huge bulk through the weakening lattice.

The girl, standing pale and rigid against the farther wall, sought with
ever-increasing terror for some loophole of escape.  Suddenly her hand,
tight-pressed against her bosom, felt the hard outline of the revolver
that Clayton had left with her earlier in the day.

Quickly she snatched it from its hiding-place, and, leveling it full at
the lioness's face, pulled the trigger.

There was a flash of flame, the roar of the discharge, and an answering
roar of pain and anger from the beast.

Jane Porter saw the great form disappear from the window, and then she,
too, fainted, the revolver falling at her side.

But Sabor was not killed.  The bullet had but inflicted a painful wound
in one of the great shoulders.  It was the surprise at the blinding
flash and the deafening roar that had caused her hasty but temporary
retreat.

In another instant she was back at the lattice, and with renewed fury
was clawing at the aperture, but with lessened effect, since the
wounded member was almost useless.

She saw her prey--the two women--lying senseless upon the floor.  There
was no longer any resistance to be overcome.  Her meat lay before her,
and Sabor had only to worm her way through the lattice to claim it.

Slowly she forced her great bulk, inch by inch, through the opening.
Now her head was through, now one great forearm and shoulder.

Carefully she drew up the wounded member to insinuate it gently beyond
the tight pressing bars.

A moment more and both shoulders through, the long, sinuous body and
the narrow hips would glide quickly after.

It was on this sight that Jane Porter again opened her eyes.




Chapter XV

The Forest God


When Clayton heard the report of the firearm he fell into an agony of
fear and apprehension.  He knew that one of the sailors might be the
author of it; but the fact that he had left the revolver with Jane,
together with the overwrought condition of his nerves, made him
morbidly positive that she was threatened with some great danger.
Perhaps even now she was attempting to defend herself against some
savage man or beast.

What were the thoughts of his strange captor or guide Clayton could
only vaguely conjecture; but that he had heard the shot, and was in
some manner affected by it was quite evident, for he quickened his pace
so appreciably that Clayton, stumbling blindly in his wake, was down a
dozen times in as many minutes in a vain effort to keep pace with him,
and soon was left hopelessly behind.

Fearing that he would again be irretrievably lost, he called aloud to
the wild man ahead of him, and in a moment had the satisfaction of
seeing him drop lightly to his side from the branches above.

For a moment Tarzan looked at the young man closely, as though
undecided as to just what was best to do; then, stooping down before
Clayton, he motioned him to grasp him about the neck, and, with the
white man upon his back, Tarzan took to the trees.

The next few minutes the young Englishman never forgot.  High into
bending and swaying branches he was borne with what seemed to him
incredible swiftness, while Tarzan chafed at the slowness of his
progress.

From one lofty branch the agile creature swung with Clayton through a
dizzy arc to a neighboring tree; then for a hundred yards maybe the
sure feet threaded a maze of interwoven limbs, balancing like a
tightrope walker high above the black depths of verdure beneath.

From the first sensation of chilling fear Clayton passed to one of keen
admiration and envy of those giant muscles and that wondrous instinct
or knowledge which guided this forest god through the inky blackness of
the night as easily and safely as Clayton would have strolled a London
street at high noon.

Occasionally they would enter a spot where the foliage above was less
dense, and the bright rays of the moon lit up before Clayton's
wondering eyes the strange path they were traversing.

At such times the man fairly caught his breath at sight of the horrid
depths below them, for Tarzan took the easiest way, which often led
over a hundred feet above the earth.

And yet with all his seeming speed, Tarzan was in reality feeling his
way with comparative slowness, searching constantly for limbs of
adequate strength for the maintenance of this double weight.

Presently they came to the clearing before the beach.  Tarzan's quick
ears had heard the strange sounds of Sabor's efforts to force her way
through the lattice, and it seemed to Clayton that they dropped a
straight hundred feet to earth, so quickly did Tarzan descend.  Yet
when they struck the ground it was with scarce a jar; and as Clayton
released his hold on the ape-man he saw him dart like a squirrel for
the opposite side of the cabin.

The Englishman sprang quickly after him just in time to see the hind
quarters of some huge animal about to disappear through the window of
the cabin.

As Jane opened her eyes to a realization of the imminent peril which
threatened her, her brave young heart gave up at last its final vestige
of hope.  But then to her surprise she saw the huge animal being slowly
drawn back through the window, and in the moonlight beyond she saw the
heads and shoulders of two men.

As Clayton rounded the corner of the cabin to behold the animal
disappearing within, it was also to see the ape-man seize the long tail
in both hands, and, bracing himself with his feet against the side of
the cabin, throw all his mighty strength into the effort to draw the
beast out of the interior.

Clayton was quick to lend a hand, but the ape-man jabbered to him in a
commanding and peremptory tone something which Clayton knew to be
orders, though he could not understand them.

At last, under their combined efforts, the great body was slowly
dragged farther and farther outside the window, and then there came to
Clayton's mind a dawning conception of the rash bravery of his
companion's act.

For a naked man to drag a shrieking, clawing man-eater forth from a
window by the tail to save a strange white girl, was indeed the last
word in heroism.

Insofar as Clayton was concerned it was a very different matter, since
the girl was not only of his own kind and race, but was the one woman
in all the world whom he loved.

Though he knew that the lioness would make short work of both of them,
he pulled with a will to keep it from Jane Porter.  And then he
recalled the battle between this man and the great, black-maned lion
which he had witnessed a short time before, and he commenced to feel
more assurance.

Tarzan was still issuing orders which Clayton could not understand.

He was trying to tell the stupid white man to plunge his poisoned
arrows into Sabor's back and sides, and to reach the savage heart with
the long, thin hunting knife that hung at Tarzan's hip; but the man
would not understand, and Tarzan did not dare release his hold to do
the things himself, for he knew that the puny white man never could
hold mighty Sabor alone, for an instant.

Slowly the lioness was emerging from the window.  At last her shoulders
were out.

And then Clayton saw an incredible thing.  Tarzan, racking his brains
for some means to cope single-handed with the infuriated beast, had
suddenly recalled his battle with Terkoz; and as the great shoulders
came clear of the window, so that the lioness hung upon the sill only
by her forepaws, Tarzan suddenly released his hold upon the brute.

With the quickness of a striking rattler he launched himself full upon
Sabor's back, his strong young arms seeking and gaining a full-Nelson
upon the beast, as he had learned it that other day during his bloody,
wrestling victory over Terkoz.

With a roar the lioness turned completely over upon her back, falling
full upon her enemy; but the black-haired giant only closed tighter his
hold.

Pawing and tearing at earth and air, Sabor rolled and threw herself
this way and that in an effort to dislodge this strange antagonist; but
ever tighter and tighter drew the iron bands that were forcing her head
lower and lower upon her tawny breast.

Higher crept the steel forearms of the ape-man about the back of
Sabor's neck.  Weaker and weaker became the lioness's efforts.

At last Clayton saw the immense muscles of Tarzan's shoulders and
biceps leap into corded knots beneath the silver moonlight.  There was
a long sustained and supreme effort on the ape-man's part--and the
vertebrae of Sabor's neck parted with a sharp snap.

In an instant Tarzan was upon his feet, and for the second time that
day Clayton heard the bull ape's savage roar of victory.  Then he heard
Jane's agonized cry:

"Cecil--Mr. Clayton!  Oh, what is it?  What is it?"

Running quickly to the cabin door, Clayton called out that all was
right, and shouted to her to open the door.  As quickly as she could
she raised the great bar and fairly dragged Clayton within.

"What was that awful noise?" she whispered, shrinking close to him.

"It was the cry of the kill from the throat of the man who has just
saved your life, Miss Porter.  Wait, I will fetch him so you may thank
him."

The frightened girl would not be left alone, so she accompanied Clayton
to the side of the cabin where lay the dead body of the lioness.

Tarzan of the Apes was gone.

Clayton called several times, but there was no reply, and so the two
returned to the greater safety of the interior.

"What a frightful sound!" cried Jane, "I shudder at the mere thought of
it.  Do not tell me that a human throat voiced that hideous and
fearsome shriek."

"But it did, Miss Porter," replied Clayton; "or at least if not a human
throat that of a forest god."

And then he told her of his experiences with this strange creature--of
how twice the wild man had saved his life--of the wondrous strength,
and agility, and bravery--of the brown skin and the handsome face.

"I cannot make it out at all," he concluded.  "At first I thought he
might be Tarzan of the Apes; but he neither speaks nor understands
English, so that theory is untenable."

"Well, whatever he may be," cried the girl, "we owe him our lives, and
may God bless him and keep him in safety in his wild and savage jungle!"

"Amen," said Clayton, fervently.

"For the good Lord's sake, ain't I dead?"

The two turned to see Esmeralda sitting upright upon the floor, her
great eyes rolling from side to side as though she could not believe
their testimony as to her whereabouts.

And now, for Jane Porter, the reaction came, and she threw herself upon
the bench, sobbing with hysterical laughter.




Chapter XVI

"Most Remarkable"


Several miles south of the cabin, upon a strip of sandy beach, stood
two old men, arguing.

Before them stretched the broad Atlantic.  At their backs was the Dark
Continent.  Close around them loomed the impenetrable blackness of the
jungle.

Savage beasts roared and growled; noises, hideous and weird, assailed
their ears.  They had wandered for miles in search of their camp, but
always in the wrong direction.  They were as hopelessly lost as though
they suddenly had been transported to another world.

At such a time, indeed, every fiber of their combined intellects must
have been concentrated upon the vital question of the minute--the
life-and-death question to them of retracing their steps to camp.

Samuel T. Philander was speaking.

"But, my dear professor," he was saying, "I still maintain that but for
the victories of Ferdinand and Isabella over the fifteenth-century
Moors in Spain the world would be today a thousand years in advance of
where we now find ourselves.  The Moors were essentially a tolerant,
broad-minded, liberal race of agriculturists, artisans and
merchants--the very type of people that has made possible such
civilization as we find today in America and Europe--while the
Spaniards--"

"Tut, tut, dear Mr. Philander," interrupted Professor Porter; "their
religion positively precluded the possibilities you suggest.  Moslemism
was, is, and always will be, a blight on that scientific progress which
has marked--"

"Bless me!  Professor," interjected Mr. Philander, who had turned his
gaze toward the jungle, "there seems to be someone approaching."

Professor Archimedes Q. Porter turned in the direction indicated by the
nearsighted Mr. Philander.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," he chided.  "How often must I urge you to
seek that absolute concentration of your mental faculties which alone
may permit you to bring to bear the highest powers of intellectuality
upon the momentous problems which naturally fall to the lot of great
minds?  And now I find you guilty of a most flagrant breach of courtesy
in interrupting my learned discourse to call attention to a mere
quadruped of the genus FELIS.  As I was saying, Mr.--"

"Heavens, Professor, a lion?" cried Mr. Philander, straining his weak
eyes toward the dim figure outlined against the dark tropical
underbrush.

"Yes, yes, Mr. Philander, if you insist upon employing slang in your
discourse, a 'lion.'  But as I was saying--"

"Bless me, Professor," again interrupted Mr. Philander; "permit me to
suggest that doubtless the Moors who were conquered in the fifteenth
century will continue in that most regrettable condition for the time
being at least, even though we postpone discussion of that world
calamity until we may attain the enchanting view of yon FELIS CARNIVORA
which distance proverbially is credited with lending."

In the meantime the lion had approached with quiet dignity to within
ten paces of the two men, where he stood curiously watching them.

The moonlight flooded the beach, and the strange group stood out in
bold relief against the yellow sand.

"Most reprehensible, most reprehensible," exclaimed Professor Porter,
with a faint trace of irritation in his voice.  "Never, Mr. Philander,
never before in my life have I known one of these animals to be
permitted to roam at large from its cage.  I shall most certainly
report this outrageous breach of ethics to the directors of the
adjacent zoological garden."

"Quite right, Professor," agreed Mr. Philander, "and the sooner it is
done the better.  Let us start now."

Seizing the professor by the arm, Mr. Philander set off in the
direction that would put the greatest distance between themselves and
the lion.

They had proceeded but a short distance when a backward glance revealed
to the horrified gaze of Mr. Philander that the lion was following
them.  He tightened his grip upon the protesting professor and
increased his speed.

"As I was saying, Mr. Philander," repeated Professor Porter.

Mr. Philander took another hasty glance rearward.  The lion also had
quickened his gait, and was doggedly maintaining an unvarying distance
behind them.

"He is following us!" gasped Mr. Philander, breaking into a run.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," remonstrated the professor, "this unseemly
haste is most unbecoming to men of letters.  What will our friends
think of us, who may chance to be upon the street and witness our
frivolous antics?  Pray let us proceed with more decorum."

Mr. Philander stole another observation astern.

The lion was bounding along in easy leaps scarce five paces behind.

Mr. Philander dropped the professor's arm, and broke into a mad orgy of
speed that would have done credit to any varsity track team.

"As I was saying, Mr. Philander--" screamed Professor Porter, as,
metaphorically speaking, he himself "threw her into high."  He, too,
had caught a fleeting backward glimpse of cruel yellow eyes and half
open mouth within startling proximity of his person.

With streaming coat tails and shiny silk hat Professor Archimedes Q.
Porter fled through the moonlight close upon the heels of Mr. Samuel T.
Philander.

Before them a point of the jungle ran out toward a narrow promontory,
and it was for the haven of the trees he saw there that Mr. Samuel T.
Philander directed his prodigious leaps and bounds; while from the
shadows of this same spot peered two keen eyes in interested
appreciation of the race.

It was Tarzan of the Apes who watched, with face a-grin, this odd game
of follow-the-leader.

He knew the two men were safe enough from attack in so far as the lion
was concerned.  The very fact that Numa had foregone such easy prey at
all convinced the wise forest craft of Tarzan that Numa's belly already
was full.

The lion might stalk them until hungry again; but the chances were that
if not angered he would soon tire of the sport, and slink away to his
jungle lair.

Really, the one great danger was that one of the men might stumble and
fall, and then the yellow devil would be upon him in a moment and the
joy of the kill would be too great a temptation to withstand.

So Tarzan swung quickly to a lower limb in line with the approaching
fugitives; and as Mr. Samuel T. Philander came panting and blowing
beneath him, already too spent to struggle up to the safety of the
limb, Tarzan reached down and, grasping him by the collar of his coat,
yanked him to the limb by his side.

Another moment brought the professor within the sphere of the friendly
grip, and he, too, was drawn upward to safety just as the baffled Numa,
with a roar, leaped to recover his vanishing quarry.

For a moment the two men clung panting to the great branch, while
Tarzan squatted with his back to the stem of the tree, watching them
with mingled curiosity and amusement.

It was the professor who first broke the silence.

"I am deeply pained, Mr. Philander, that you should have evinced such a
paucity of manly courage in the presence of one of the lower orders,
and by your crass timidity have caused me to exert myself to such an
unaccustomed degree in order that I might resume my discourse.  As I
was saying, Mr. Philander, when you interrupted me, the Moors--"

"Professor Archimedes Q. Porter," broke in Mr. Philander, in icy tones,
"the time has arrived when patience becomes a crime and mayhem appears
garbed in the mantle of virtue.  You have accused me of cowardice.  You
have insinuated that you ran only to overtake me, not to escape the
clutches of the lion.  Have a care, Professor Archimedes Q. Porter!  I
am a desperate man.  Goaded by long-suffering patience the worm will
turn."

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut!" cautioned Professor Porter; "you
forget yourself."

"I forget nothing as yet, Professor Archimedes Q. Porter; but, believe
me, sir, I am tottering on the verge of forgetfulness as to your
exalted position in the world of science, and your gray hairs."

The professor sat in silence for a few minutes, and the darkness hid
the grim smile that wreathed his wrinkled countenance.  Presently he
spoke.

"Look here, Skinny Philander," he said, in belligerent tones, "if you
are lookin' for a scrap, peel off your coat and come on down on the
ground, and I'll punch your head just as I did sixty years ago in the
alley back of Porky Evans' barn."

"Ark!" gasped the astonished Mr. Philander.  "Lordy, how good that
sounds!  When you're human, Ark, I love you; but somehow it seems as
though you had forgotten how to be human for the last twenty years."

The professor reached out a thin, trembling old hand through the
darkness until it found his old friend's shoulder.

"Forgive me, Skinny," he said, softly.  "It hasn't been quite twenty
years, and God alone knows how hard I have tried to be 'human' for
Jane's sake, and yours, too, since He took my other Jane away."

Another old hand stole up from Mr. Philander's side to clasp the one
that lay upon his shoulder, and no other message could better have
translated the one heart to the other.

They did not speak for some minutes.  The lion below them paced
nervously back and forth.  The third figure in the tree was hidden by
the dense shadows near the stem.  He, too, was silent--motionless as a
graven image.

"You certainly pulled me up into this tree just in time," said the
professor at last.  "I want to thank you.  You saved my life."

"But I didn't pull you up here, Professor," said Mr. Philander.  "Bless
me!  The excitement of the moment quite caused me to forget that I
myself was drawn up here by some outside agency--there must be someone
or something in this tree with us."

"Eh?" ejaculated Professor Porter.  "Are you quite positive, Mr.
Philander?"

"Most positive, Professor," replied Mr. Philander, "and," he added, "I
think we should thank the party.  He may be sitting right next to you
now, Professor."

"Eh?  What's that?  Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut!" said Professor
Porter, edging cautiously nearer to Mr. Philander.

Just then it occurred to Tarzan of the Apes that Numa had loitered
beneath the tree for a sufficient length of time, so he raised his
young head toward the heavens, and there rang out upon the terrified
ears of the two old men the awful warning challenge of the anthropoid.

The two friends, huddled trembling in their precarious position on the
limb, saw the great lion halt in his restless pacing as the
blood-curdling cry smote his ears, and then slink quickly into the
jungle, to be instantly lost to view.

"Even the lion trembles in fear," whispered Mr. Philander.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," murmured Professor Porter,
clutching frantically at Mr. Philander to regain the balance which the
sudden fright had so perilously endangered.  Unfortunately for them
both, Mr. Philander's center of equilibrium was at that very moment
hanging upon the ragged edge of nothing, so that it needed but the
gentle impetus supplied by the additional weight of Professor Porter's
body to topple the devoted secretary from the limb.

For a moment they swayed uncertainly, and then, with mingled and most
unscholarly shrieks, they pitched headlong from the tree, locked in
frenzied embrace.

It was quite some moments ere either moved, for both were positive that
any such attempt would reveal so many breaks and fractures as to make
further progress impossible.

At length Professor Porter made an attempt to move one leg.  To his
surprise, it responded to his will as in days gone by.  He now drew up
its mate and stretched it forth again.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," he murmured.

"Thank God, Professor," whispered Mr. Philander, fervently, "you are
not dead, then?"

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut," cautioned Professor Porter, "I do
not know with accuracy as yet."

With infinite solicitude Professor Porter wiggled his right arm--joy!
It was intact.  Breathlessly he waved his left arm above his prostrate
body--it waved!

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," he said.

"To whom are you signaling, Professor?" asked Mr. Philander, in an
excited tone.

Professor Porter deigned to make no response to this puerile inquiry.
Instead he raised his head gently from the ground, nodding it back and
forth a half dozen times.

"Most remarkable," he breathed.  "It remains intact."

Mr. Philander had not moved from where he had fallen; he had not dared
the attempt.  How indeed could one move when one's arms and legs and
back were broken?

One eye was buried in the soft loam; the other, rolling sidewise, was
fixed in awe upon the strange gyrations of Professor Porter.

"How sad!" exclaimed Mr. Philander, half aloud.  "Concussion of the
brain, superinducing total mental aberration.  How very sad indeed! and
for one still so young!"

Professor Porter rolled over upon his stomach; gingerly he bowed his
back until he resembled a huge tom cat in proximity to a yelping dog.
Then he sat up and felt of various portions of his anatomy.

"They are all here," he exclaimed.  "Most remarkable!"

Whereupon he arose, and, bending a scathing glance upon the still
prostrate form of Mr. Samuel T. Philander, he said:

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander; this is no time to indulge in slothful ease.
We must be up and doing."

Mr. Philander lifted his other eye out of the mud and gazed in
speechless rage at Professor Porter.  Then he attempted to rise; nor
could there have been any more surprised than he when his efforts were
immediately crowned with marked success.

He was still bursting with rage, however, at the cruel injustice of
Professor Porter's insinuation, and was on the point of rendering a
tart rejoinder when his eyes fell upon a strange figure standing a few
paces away, scrutinizing them intently.

Professor Porter had recovered his shiny silk hat, which he had brushed
carefully upon the sleeve of his coat and replaced upon his head.  When
he saw Mr. Philander pointing to something behind him he turned to
behold a giant, naked but for a loin cloth and a few metal ornaments,
standing motionless before him.

"Good evening, sir!" said the professor, lifting his hat.

For reply the giant motioned them to follow him, and set off up the
beach in the direction from which they had recently come.

"I think it the better part of discretion to follow him," said Mr.
Philander.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," returned the professor.  "A short time since
you were advancing a most logical argument in substantiation of your
theory that camp lay directly south of us.  I was skeptical, but you
finally convinced me; so now I am positive that toward the south we
must travel to reach our friends.  Therefore I shall continue south."

"But, Professor Porter, this man may know better than either of us.  He
seems to be indigenous to this part of the world.  Let us at least
follow him for a short distance."

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," repeated the professor.  "I am a difficult
man to convince, but when once convinced my decision is unalterable.  I
shall continue in the proper direction, if I have to circumambulate the
continent of Africa to reach my destination."

Further argument was interrupted by Tarzan, who, seeing that these
strange men were not following him, had returned to their side.

Again he beckoned to them; but still they stood in argument.

Presently the ape-man lost patience with their stupid ignorance.  He
grasped the frightened Mr. Philander by the shoulder, and before that
worthy gentleman knew whether he was being killed or merely maimed for
life, Tarzan had tied one end of his rope securely about Mr.
Philander's neck.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," remonstrated Professor Porter; "it is most
unbeseeming in you to submit to such indignities."

But scarcely were the words out of his mouth ere he, too, had been
seized and securely bound by the neck with the same rope.  Then Tarzan
set off toward the north, leading the now thoroughly frightened
professor and his secretary.

In deathly silence they proceeded for what seemed hours to the two
tired and hopeless old men; but presently as they topped a little rise
of ground they were overjoyed to see the cabin lying before them, not a
hundred yards distant.

Here Tarzan released them, and, pointing toward the little building,
vanished into the jungle beside them.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable!" gasped the professor.  "But you
see, Mr. Philander, that I was quite right, as usual; and but for your
stubborn willfulness we should have escaped a series of most
humiliating, not to say dangerous accidents.  Pray allow yourself to be
guided by a more mature and practical mind hereafter when in need of
wise counsel."

Mr. Samuel T. Philander was too much relieved at the happy outcome to
their adventure to take umbrage at the professor's cruel fling.
Instead he grasped his friend's arm and hastened him forward in the
direction of the cabin.

It was a much-relieved party of castaways that found itself once more
united.  Dawn discovered them still recounting their various adventures
and speculating upon the identity of the strange guardian and protector
they had found on this savage shore.

Esmeralda was positive that it was none other than an angel of the
Lord, sent down especially to watch over them.

"Had you seen him devour the raw meat of the lion, Esmeralda," laughed
Clayton, "you would have thought him a very material angel."

"There was nothing heavenly about his voice," said Jane Porter, with a
little shudder at recollection of the awful roar which had followed the
killing of the lioness.

"Nor did it precisely comport with my preconceived ideas of the dignity
of divine messengers," remarked Professor Porter, "when
the--ah--gentleman tied two highly respectable and erudite scholars
neck to neck and dragged them through the jungle as though they had
been cows."




Chapter XVII

Burials


As it was now quite light, the party, none of whom had eaten or slept
since the previous morning, began to bestir themselves to prepare food.

The mutineers of the Arrow had landed a small supply of dried meats,
canned soups and vegetables, crackers, flour, tea, and coffee for the
five they had marooned, and these were hurriedly drawn upon to satisfy
the craving of long-famished appetites.

The next task was to make the cabin habitable, and to this end it was
decided to at once remove the gruesome relics of the tragedy which had
taken place there on some bygone day.

Professor Porter and Mr. Philander were deeply interested in examining
the skeletons.  The two larger, they stated, had belonged to a male and
female of one of the higher white races.

The smallest skeleton was given but passing attention, as its location,
in the crib, left no doubt as to its having been the infant offspring
of this unhappy couple.

As they were preparing the skeleton of the man for burial, Clayton
discovered a massive ring which had evidently encircled the man's
finger at the time of his death, for one of the slender bones of the
hand still lay within the golden bauble.

Picking it up to examine it, Clayton gave a cry of astonishment, for
the ring bore the crest of the house of Greystoke.

At the same time, Jane discovered the books in the cupboard, and on
opening the fly-leaf of one of them saw the name, JOHN CLAYTON, LONDON.
In a second book which she hurriedly examined was the single name,
GREYSTOKE.

"Why, Mr. Clayton," she cried, "what does this mean?  Here are the
names of some of your own people in these books."

"And here," he replied gravely, "is the great ring of the house of
Greystoke which has been lost since my uncle, John Clayton, the former
Lord Greystoke, disappeared, presumably lost at sea."

"But how do you account for these things being here, in this savage
African jungle?" exclaimed the girl.

"There is but one way to account for it, Miss Porter," said Clayton.
"The late Lord Greystoke was not drowned.  He died here in this cabin
and this poor thing upon the floor is all that is mortal of him."

"Then this must have been Lady Greystoke," said Jane reverently,
indicating the poor mass of bones upon the bed.

"The beautiful Lady Alice," replied Clayton, "of whose many virtues and
remarkable personal charms I often have heard my mother and father
speak.  Poor woman," he murmured sadly.

With deep reverence and solemnity the bodies of the late Lord and Lady
Greystoke were buried beside their little African cabin, and between
them was placed the tiny skeleton of the baby of Kala, the ape.

As Mr. Philander was placing the frail bones of the infant in a bit of
sail cloth, he examined the skull minutely.  Then he called Professor
Porter to his side, and the two argued in low tones for several minutes.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," said Professor Porter.

"Bless me," said Mr. Philander, "we must acquaint Mr. Clayton with our
discovery at once."

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut!" remonstrated Professor Archimedes
Q. Porter.  "'Let the dead past bury its dead.'"

And so the white-haired old man repeated the burial service over this
strange grave, while his four companions stood with bowed and uncovered
heads about him.

From the trees Tarzan of the Apes watched the solemn ceremony; but most
of all he watched the sweet face and graceful figure of Jane Porter.

In his savage, untutored breast new emotions were stirring.  He could
not fathom them.  He wondered why he felt so great an interest in these
people--why he had gone to such pains to save the three men.  But he
did not wonder why he had torn Sabor from the tender flesh of the
strange girl.

Surely the men were stupid and ridiculous and cowardly.  Even Manu, the
monkey, was more intelligent than they.  If these were creatures of his
own kind he was doubtful if his past pride in blood was warranted.

But the girl, ah--that was a different matter.  He did not reason here.
He knew that she was created to be protected, and that he was created
to protect her.

He wondered why they had dug a great hole in the ground merely to bury
dry bones.  Surely there was no sense in that; no one wanted to steal
dry bones.

Had there been meat upon them he could have understood, for thus alone
might one keep his meat from Dango, the hyena, and the other robbers of
the jungle.

When the grave had been filled with earth the little party turned back
toward the cabin, and Esmeralda, still weeping copiously for the two
she had never heard of before today, and who had been dead twenty
years, chanced to glance toward the harbor.  Instantly her tears ceased.

"Look at them low down white trash out there!" she shrilled, pointing
toward the Arrow.  "They-all's a desecrating us, right here on this
here perverted island."

And, sure enough, the Arrow was being worked toward the open sea,
slowly, through the harbor's entrance.

"They promised to leave us firearms and ammunition," said Clayton.
"The merciless beasts!"

"It is the work of that fellow they call Snipes, I am sure," said Jane.
"King was a scoundrel, but he had a little sense of humanity.  If they
had not killed him I know that he would have seen that we were properly
provided for before they left us to our fate."

"I regret that they did not visit us before sailing," said Professor
Porter.  "I had proposed requesting them to leave the treasure with us,
as I shall be a ruined man if that is lost."

Jane looked at her father sadly.

"Never mind, dear," she said.  "It wouldn't have done any good, because
it is solely for the treasure that they killed their officers and
landed us upon this awful shore."

"Tut, tut, child, tut, tut!" replied Professor Porter.  "You are a good
child, but inexperienced in practical matters," and Professor Porter
turned and walked slowly away toward the jungle, his hands clasped
beneath his long coat tails and his eyes bent upon the ground.

His daughter watched him with a pathetic smile upon her lips, and then
turning to Mr. Philander, she whispered:

"Please don't let him wander off again as he did yesterday.  We depend
upon you, you know, to keep a close watch upon him."

"He becomes more difficult to handle each day," replied Mr. Philander,
with a sigh and a shake of his head.  "I presume he is now off to
report to the directors of the Zoo that one of their lions was at large
last night.  Oh, Miss Jane, you don't know what I have to contend with."

"Yes, I do, Mr. Philander; but while we all love him, you alone are
best fitted to manage him; for, regardless of what he may say to you,
he respects your great learning, and, therefore, has immense confidence
in your judgment.  The poor dear cannot differentiate between erudition
and wisdom."

Mr. Philander, with a mildly puzzled expression on his face, turned to
pursue Professor Porter, and in his mind he was revolving the question
of whether he should feel complimented or aggrieved at Miss Porter's
rather backhanded compliment.

Tarzan had seen the consternation depicted upon the faces of the little
group as they witnessed the departure of the Arrow; so, as the ship was
a wonderful novelty to him in addition, he determined to hasten out to
the point of land at the north of the harbor's mouth and obtain a
nearer view of the boat, as well as to learn, if possible, the
direction of its flight.

Swinging through the trees with great speed, he reached the point only
a moment after the ship had passed out of the harbor, so that he
obtained an excellent view of the wonders of this strange, floating
house.

There were some twenty men running hither and thither about the deck,
pulling and hauling on ropes.

A light land breeze was blowing, and the ship had been worked through
the harbor's mouth under scant sail, but now that they had cleared the
point every available shred of canvas was being spread that she might
stand out to sea as handily as possible.

Tarzan watched the graceful movements of the ship in rapt admiration,
and longed to be aboard her.  Presently his keen eyes caught the
faintest suspicion of smoke on the far northern horizon, and he
wondered over the cause of such a thing out on the great water.

About the same time the look-out on the Arrow must have discerned it,
for in a few minutes Tarzan saw the sails being shifted and shortened.
The ship came about, and presently he knew that she was beating back
toward land.

A man at the bows was constantly heaving into the sea a rope to the end
of which a small object was fastened.  Tarzan wondered what the purpose
of this action might be.

At last the ship came up directly into the wind; the anchor was
lowered; down came the sails.  There was great scurrying about on deck.

A boat was lowered, and in it a great chest was placed.  Then a dozen
sailors bent to the oars and pulled rapidly toward the point where
Tarzan crouched in the branches of a tree.

In the stern of the boat, as it drew nearer, Tarzan saw the rat-faced
man.

It was but a few minutes later that the boat touched the beach.  The
men jumped out and lifted the great chest to the sand.  They were on
the north side of the point so that their presence was concealed from
those at the cabin.

The men argued angrily for a moment.  Then the rat-faced one, with
several companions, ascended the low bluff on which stood the tree that
concealed Tarzan.  They looked about for several minutes.

"Here is a good place," said the rat-faced sailor, indicating a spot
beneath Tarzan's tree.

"It is as good as any," replied one of his companions.  "If they catch
us with the treasure aboard it will all be confiscated anyway.  We
might as well bury it here on the chance that some of us will escape
the gallows to come back and enjoy it later."

The rat-faced one now called to the men who had remained at the boat,
and they came slowly up the bank carrying picks and shovels.

"Hurry, you!" cried Snipes.

"Stow it!" retorted one of the men, in a surly tone.  "You're no
admiral, you damned shrimp."

"I'm Cap'n here, though, I'll have you to understand, you swab,"
shrieked Snipes, with a volley of frightful oaths.

"Steady, boys," cautioned one of the men who had not spoken before.
"It ain't goin' to get us nothing by fightin' amongst ourselves."

"Right enough," replied the sailor who had resented Snipes' autocratic
tones; "but it ain't a-goin' to get nobody nothin' to put on airs in
this bloomin' company neither."

"You fellows dig here," said Snipes, indicating a spot beneath the
tree.  "And while you're diggin', Peter kin be a-makin' of a map of the
location so's we kin find it again.  You, Tom, and Bill, take a couple
more down and fetch up the chest."

"Wot are you a-goin' to do?" asked he of the previous altercation.
"Just boss?"

"Git busy there," growled Snipes.  "You didn't think your Cap'n was
a-goin' to dig with a shovel, did you?"

The men all looked up angrily.  None of them liked Snipes, and this
disagreeable show of authority since he had murdered King, the real
head and ringleader of the mutineers, had only added fuel to the flames
of their hatred.

"Do you mean to say that you don't intend to take a shovel, and lend a
hand with this work?  Your shoulder's not hurt so all-fired bad as
that," said Tarrant, the sailor who had before spoken.

"Not by a damned sight," replied Snipes, fingering the butt of his
revolver nervously.

"Then, by God," replied Tarrant, "if you won't take a shovel you'll
take a pickax."

With the words he raised his pick above his head, and, with a mighty
blow, he buried the point in Snipes' brain.

For a moment the men stood silently looking at the result of their
fellow's grim humor.  Then one of them spoke.

"Served the skunk jolly well right," he said.

One of the others commenced to ply his pick to the ground.  The soil
was soft and he threw aside the pick and grasped a shovel; then the
others joined him.  There was no further comment on the killing, but
the men worked in a better frame of mind than they had since Snipes had
assumed command.

When they had a trench of ample size to bury the chest, Tarrant
suggested that they enlarge it and inter Snipes' body on top of the
chest.

"It might 'elp fool any as 'appened to be diggin' 'ereabouts," he
explained.

The others saw the cunning of the suggestion, and so the trench was
lengthened to accommodate the corpse, and in the center a deeper hole
was excavated for the box, which was first wrapped in sailcloth and
then lowered to its place, which brought its top about a foot below the
bottom of the grave.  Earth was shovelled in and tramped down about the
chest until the bottom of the grave showed level and uniform.

Two of the men rolled the rat-faced corpse unceremoniously into the
grave, after first stripping it of its weapons and various other
articles which the several members of the party coveted for their own.

They then filled the grave with earth and tramped upon it until it
would hold no more.

The balance of the loose earth was thrown far and wide, and a mass of
dead undergrowth spread in as natural a manner as possible over the
new-made grave to obliterate all signs of the ground having been
disturbed.

Their work done the sailors returned to the small boat, and pulled off
rapidly toward the Arrow.

The breeze had increased considerably, and as the smoke upon the
horizon was now plainly discernible in considerable volume, the
mutineers lost no time in getting under full sail and bearing away
toward the southwest.

Tarzan, an interested spectator of all that had taken place, sat
speculating on the strange actions of these peculiar creatures.

Men were indeed more foolish and more cruel than the beasts of the
jungle!  How fortunate was he who lived in the peace and security of
the great forest!

Tarzan wondered what the chest they had buried contained.  If they did
not want it why did they not merely throw it into the water?  That
would have been much easier.

Ah, he thought, but they do want it.  They have hidden it here because
they intend returning for it later.

Tarzan dropped to the ground and commenced to examine the earth about
the excavation.  He was looking to see if these creatures had dropped
anything which he might like to own.  Soon he discovered a spade hidden
by the underbrush which they had laid upon the grave.

He seized it and attempted to use it as he had seen the sailors do.  It
was awkward work and hurt his bare feet, but he persevered until he had
partially uncovered the body.  This he dragged from the grave and laid
to one side.

Then he continued digging until he had unearthed the chest.  This also
he dragged to the side of the corpse.  Then he filled in the smaller
hole below the grave, replaced the body and the earth around and above
it, covered it over with underbrush, and returned to the chest.

Four sailors had sweated beneath the burden of its weight--Tarzan of
the Apes picked it up as though it had been an empty packing case, and
with the spade slung to his back by a piece of rope, carried it off
into the densest part of the jungle.

He could not well negotiate the trees with his awkward burden, but he
kept to the trails, and so made fairly good time.

For several hours he traveled a little north of east until he came to
an impenetrable wall of matted and tangled vegetation.  Then he took to
the lower branches, and in another fifteen minutes he emerged into the
amphitheater of the apes, where they met in council, or to celebrate
the rites of the Dum-Dum.

Near the center of the clearing, and not far from the drum, or altar,
he commenced to dig.  This was harder work than turning up the freshly
excavated earth at the grave, but Tarzan of the Apes was persevering
and so he kept at his labor until he was rewarded by seeing a hole
sufficiently deep to receive the chest and effectually hide it from
view.

Why had he gone to all this labor without knowing the value of the
contents of the chest?

Tarzan of the Apes had a man's figure and a man's brain, but he was an
ape by training and environment.  His brain told him that the chest
contained something valuable, or the men would not have hidden it.  His
training had taught him to imitate whatever was new and unusual, and
now the natural curiosity, which is as common to men as to apes,
prompted him to open the chest and examine its contents.

But the heavy lock and massive iron bands baffled both his cunning and
his immense strength, so that he was compelled to bury the chest
without having his curiosity satisfied.

By the time Tarzan had hunted his way back to the vicinity of the
cabin, feeding as he went, it was quite dark.

Within the little building a light was burning, for Clayton had found
an unopened tin of oil which had stood intact for twenty years, a part
of the supplies left with the Claytons by Black Michael.  The lamps
also were still useable, and thus the interior of the cabin appeared as
bright as day to the astonished Tarzan.

He had often wondered at the exact purpose of the lamps.  His reading
and the pictures had told him what they were, but he had no idea of how
they could be made to produce the wondrous sunlight that some of his
pictures had portrayed them as diffusing upon all surrounding objects.

As he approached the window nearest the door he saw that the cabin had
been divided into two rooms by a rough partition of boughs and
sailcloth.

In the front room were the three men; the two older deep in argument,
while the younger, tilted back against the wall on an improvised stool,
was deeply engrossed in reading one of Tarzan's books.

Tarzan was not particularly interested in the men, however, so he
sought the other window.  There was the girl.  How beautiful her
features!  How delicate her snowy skin!

She was writing at Tarzan's own table beneath the window.  Upon a pile
of grasses at the far side of the room lay the Negress asleep.

For an hour Tarzan feasted his eyes upon her while she wrote.  How he
longed to speak to her, but he dared not attempt it, for he was
convinced that, like the young man, she would not understand him, and
he feared, too, that he might frighten her away.

At length she arose, leaving her manuscript upon the table.  She went
to the bed upon which had been spread several layers of soft grasses.
These she rearranged.

Then she loosened the soft mass of golden hair which crowned her head.
Like a shimmering waterfall turned to burnished metal by a dying sun it
fell about her oval face; in waving lines, below her waist it tumbled.

Tarzan was spellbound.  Then she extinguished the lamp and all within
the cabin was wrapped in Cimmerian darkness.

Still Tarzan watched.  Creeping close beneath the window he waited,
listening, for half an hour.  At last he was rewarded by the sounds of
the regular breathing within which denotes sleep.

Cautiously he intruded his hand between the meshes of the lattice until
his whole arm was within the cabin.  Carefully he felt upon the desk.
At last he grasped the manuscript upon which Jane Porter had been
writing, and as cautiously withdrew his arm and hand, holding the
precious treasure.

Tarzan folded the sheets into a small parcel which he tucked into the
quiver with his arrows.  Then he melted away into the jungle as softly
and as noiselessly as a shadow.




Chapter XVIII

The Jungle Toll


Early the following morning Tarzan awoke, and his first thought of the
new day, as the last of yesterday, was of the wonderful writing which
lay hidden in his quiver.

Hurriedly he brought it forth, hoping against hope that he could read
what the beautiful white girl had written there the preceding evening.

At the first glance he suffered a bitter disappointment; never before
had he so yearned for anything as now he did for the ability to
interpret a message from that golden-haired divinity who had come so
suddenly and so unexpectedly into his life.

What did it matter if the message were not intended for him?  It was an
expression of her thoughts, and that was sufficient for Tarzan of the
Apes.

And now to be baffled by strange, uncouth characters the like of which
he had never seen before!  Why, they even tipped in the opposite
direction from all that he had ever examined either in printed books or
the difficult script of the few letters he had found.

Even the little bugs of the black book were familiar friends, though
their arrangement meant nothing to him; but these bugs were new and
unheard of.

For twenty minutes he pored over them, when suddenly they commenced to
take familiar though distorted shapes.  Ah, they were his old friends,
but badly crippled.

Then he began to make out a word here and a word there.  His heart
leaped for joy.  He could read it, and he would.

In another half hour he was progressing rapidly, and, but for an
exceptional word now and again, he found it very plain sailing.

Here is what he read:

WEST COAST OF AFRICA, ABOUT 10 DEGREES SOUTH
      LATITUDE.  (So Mr. Clayton says.)
                  February 3 (?), 1909.

DEAREST HAZEL:

It seems foolish to write you a letter that you may never see, but I
simply must tell somebody of our awful experiences since we sailed from
Europe on the ill-fated Arrow.

If we never return to civilization, as now seems only too likely, this
will at least prove a brief record of the events which led up to our
final fate, whatever it may be.

As you know, we were supposed to have set out upon a scientific
expedition to the Congo.  Papa was presumed to entertain some wondrous
theory of an unthinkably ancient civilization, the remains of which lay
buried somewhere in the Congo valley.  But after we were well under
sail the truth came out.

It seems that an old bookworm who has a book and curio shop in
Baltimore discovered between the leaves of a very old Spanish
manuscript a letter written in 1550 detailing the adventures of a crew
of mutineers of a Spanish galleon bound from Spain to South America
with a vast treasure of "doubloons" and "pieces of eight," I suppose,
for they certainly sound weird and piraty.

The writer had been one of the crew, and the letter was to his son, who
was, at the very time the letter was written, master of a Spanish
merchantman.

Many years had elapsed since the events the letter narrated had
transpired, and the old man had become a respected citizen of an
obscure Spanish town, but the love of gold was still so strong upon him
that he risked all to acquaint his son with the means of attaining
fabulous wealth for them both.

The writer told how when but a week out from Spain the crew had
mutinied and murdered every officer and man who opposed them; but they
defeated their own ends by this very act, for there was none left
competent to navigate a ship at sea.

They were blown hither and thither for two months, until sick and dying
of scurvy, starvation, and thirst, they had been wrecked on a small
islet.

The galleon was washed high upon the beach where she went to pieces;
but not before the survivors, who numbered but ten souls, had rescued
one of the great chests of treasure.

This they buried well up on the island, and for three years they lived
there in constant hope of being rescued.

One by one they sickened and died, until only one man was left, the
writer of the letter.

The men had built a boat from the wreckage of the galleon, but having
no idea where the island was located they had not dared to put to sea.

When all were dead except himself, however, the awful loneliness so
weighed upon the mind of the sole survivor that he could endure it no
longer, and choosing to risk death upon the open sea rather than
madness on the lonely isle, he set sail in his little boat after nearly
a year of solitude.

Fortunately he sailed due north, and within a week was in the track of
the Spanish merchantmen plying between the West Indies and Spain, and
was picked up by one of these vessels homeward bound.

The story he told was merely one of shipwreck in which all but a few
had perished, the balance, except himself, dying after they reached the
island.  He did not mention the mutiny or the chest of buried treasure.

The master of the merchantman assured him that from the position at
which they had picked him up, and the prevailing winds for the past
week he could have been on no other island than one of the Cape Verde
group, which lie off the West Coast of Africa in about 16 degrees or 17
degrees north latitude.

His letter described the island minutely, as well as the location of
the treasure, and was accompanied by the crudest, funniest little old
map you ever saw; with trees and rocks all marked by scrawly X's to
show the exact spot where the treasure had been buried.

When papa explained the real nature of the expedition, my heart sank,
for I know so well how visionary and impractical the poor dear has
always been that I feared that he had again been duped; especially when
he told me he had paid a thousand dollars for the letter and map.

To add to my distress, I learned that he had borrowed ten thousand
dollars more from Robert Canler, and had given his notes for the amount.

Mr. Canler had asked for no security, and you know, dearie, what that
will mean for me if papa cannot meet them.  Oh, how I detest that man!

We all tried to look on the bright side of things, but Mr. Philander,
and Mr. Clayton--he joined us in London just for the adventure--both
felt as skeptical as I.

Well, to make a long story short, we found the island and the
treasure--a great iron-bound oak chest, wrapped in many layers of oiled
sailcloth, and as strong and firm as when it had been buried nearly two
hundred years ago.

It was SIMPLY FILLED with gold coin, and was so heavy that four men
bent underneath its weight.

The horrid thing seems to bring nothing but murder and misfortune to
those who have anything to do with it, for three days after we sailed
from the Cape Verde Islands our own crew mutinied and killed every one
of their officers.

Oh, it was the most terrifying experience one could imagine--I cannot
even write of it.

They were going to kill us too, but one of them, the leader, named
King, would not let them, and so they sailed south along the coast to a
lonely spot where they found a good harbor, and here they landed and
have left us.

They sailed away with the treasure to-day, but Mr. Clayton says they
will meet with a fate similar to the mutineers of the ancient galleon,
because King, the only man aboard who knew aught of navigation, was
murdered on the beach by one of the men the day we landed.

I wish you could know Mr. Clayton; he is the dearest fellow imaginable,
and unless I am mistaken he has fallen very much in love with me.

He is the only son of Lord Greystoke, and some day will inherit the
title and estates.  In addition, he is wealthy in his own right, but
the fact that he is going to be an English Lord makes me very sad--you
know what my sentiments have always been relative to American girls who
married titled foreigners.  Oh, if he were only a plain American
gentleman!

But it isn't his fault, poor fellow, and in everything except birth he
would do credit to my country, and that is the greatest compliment I
know how to pay any man.

We have had the most weird experiences since we were landed here.  Papa
and Mr. Philander lost in the jungle, and chased by a real lion.

Mr. Clayton lost, and attacked twice by wild beasts.  Esmeralda and I
cornered in an old cabin by a perfectly awful man-eating lioness.  Oh,
it was simply "terrifical," as Esmeralda would say.

But the strangest part of it all is the wonderful creature who rescued
us.  I have not seen him, but Mr. Clayton and papa and Mr. Philander
have, and they say that he is a perfectly god-like white man tanned to
a dusky brown, with the strength of a wild elephant, the agility of a
monkey, and the bravery of a lion.

He speaks no English and vanishes as quickly and as mysteriously after
he has performed some valorous deed, as though he were a disembodied
spirit.

Then we have another weird neighbor, who printed a beautiful sign in
English and tacked it on the door of his cabin, which we have
preempted, warning us to destroy none of his belongings, and signing
himself "Tarzan of the Apes."

We have never seen him, though we think he is about, for one of the
sailors, who was going to shoot Mr. Clayton in the back, received a
spear in his shoulder from some unseen hand in the jungle.

The sailors left us but a meager supply of food, so, as we have only a
single revolver with but three cartridges left in it, we do not know
how we can procure meat, though Mr. Philander says that we can exist
indefinitely on the wild fruit and nuts which abound in the jungle.

I am very tired now, so I shall go to my funny bed of grasses which Mr.
Clayton gathered for me, but will add to this from day to day as things
happen.
                              Lovingly,
                                  JANE PORTER.

TO HAZEL STRONG, BALTIMORE, MD.


Tarzan sat in a brown study for a long time after he finished reading
the letter.  It was filled with so many new and wonderful things that
his brain was in a whirl as he attempted to digest them all.

So they did not know that he was Tarzan of the Apes.  He would tell
them.

In his tree he had constructed a rude shelter of leaves and boughs,
beneath which, protected from the rain, he had placed the few treasures
brought from the cabin.  Among these were some pencils.

He took one, and beneath Jane Porter's signature he wrote:

      I am Tarzan of the Apes


He thought that would be sufficient.  Later he would return the letter
to the cabin.

In the matter of food, thought Tarzan, they had no need to worry--he
would provide, and he did.

The next morning Jane found her missing letter in the exact spot from
which it had disappeared two nights before.  She was mystified; but
when she saw the printed words beneath her signature, she felt a cold,
clammy chill run up her spine.  She showed the letter, or rather the
last sheet with the signature, to Clayton.

"And to think," she said, "that uncanny thing was probably watching me
all the time that I was writing--oo!  It makes me shudder just to think
of it."

"But he must be friendly," reassured Clayton, "for he has returned your
letter, nor did he offer to harm you, and unless I am mistaken he left
a very substantial memento of his friendship outside the cabin door
last night, for I just found the carcass of a wild boar there as I came
out."

From then on scarcely a day passed that did not bring its offering of
game or other food.  Sometimes it was a young deer, again a quantity of
strange, cooked food--cassava cakes pilfered from the village of
Mbonga--or a boar, or leopard, and once a lion.

Tarzan derived the greatest pleasure of his life in hunting meat for
these strangers.  It seemed to him that no pleasure on earth could
compare with laboring for the welfare and protection of the beautiful
white girl.

Some day he would venture into the camp in daylight and talk with these
people through the medium of the little bugs which were familiar to
them and to Tarzan.

But he found it difficult to overcome the timidity of the wild thing of
the forest, and so day followed day without seeing a fulfillment of his
good intentions.

The party in the camp, emboldened by familiarity, wandered farther and
yet farther into the jungle in search of nuts and fruit.

Scarcely a day passed that did not find Professor Porter straying in
his preoccupied indifference toward the jaws of death.  Mr. Samuel T.
Philander, never what one might call robust, was worn to the shadow of
a shadow through the ceaseless worry and mental distraction resultant
from his Herculean efforts to safeguard the professor.

A month passed.  Tarzan had finally determined to visit the camp by
daylight.

It was early afternoon.  Clayton had wandered to the point at the
harbor's mouth to look for passing vessels.  Here he kept a great mass
of wood, high piled, ready to be ignited as a signal should a steamer
or a sail top the far horizon.

Professor Porter was wandering along the beach south of the camp with
Mr. Philander at his elbow, urging him to turn his steps back before
the two became again the sport of some savage beast.

The others gone, Jane and Esmeralda had wandered into the jungle to
gather fruit, and in their search were led farther and farther from the
cabin.

Tarzan waited in silence before the door of the little house until they
should return.  His thoughts were of the beautiful white girl.  They
were always of her now.  He wondered if she would fear him, and the
thought all but caused him to relinquish his plan.

He was rapidly becoming impatient for her return, that he might feast
his eyes upon her and be near her, perhaps touch her.  The ape-man knew
no god, but he was as near to worshipping his divinity as mortal man
ever comes to worship.  While he waited he passed the time printing a
message to her; whether he intended giving it to her he himself could
not have told, but he took infinite pleasure in seeing his thoughts
expressed in print--in which he was not so uncivilized after all.  He
wrote:


I am Tarzan of the Apes.  I want you.  I am yours.  You are mine.  We
live here together always in my house.  I will bring you the best of
fruits, the tenderest deer, the finest meats that roam the jungle.  I
will hunt for you.  I am the greatest of the jungle fighters.  I will
fight for you.  I am the mightiest of the jungle fighters.  You are
Jane Porter, I saw it in your letter.  When you see this you will know
that it is for you and that Tarzan of the Apes loves you.


As he stood, straight as a young Indian, by the door, waiting after he
had finished the message, there came to his keen ears a familiar sound.
It was the passing of a great ape through the lower branches of the
forest.

For an instant he listened intently, and then from the jungle came the
agonized scream of a woman, and Tarzan of the Apes, dropping his first
love letter upon the ground, shot like a panther into the forest.

Clayton, also, heard the scream, and Professor Porter and Mr.
Philander, and in a few minutes they came panting to the cabin, calling
out to each other a volley of excited questions as they approached.  A
glance within confirmed their worst fears.

Jane and Esmeralda were not there.

Instantly, Clayton, followed by the two old men, plunged into the
jungle, calling the girl's name aloud.  For half an hour they stumbled
on, until Clayton, by merest chance, came upon the prostrate form of
Esmeralda.

He stopped beside her, feeling for her pulse and then listening for her
heartbeats.  She lived.  He shook her.

"Esmeralda!" he shrieked in her ear.  "Esmeralda!  For God's sake,
where is Miss Porter?  What has happened?  Esmeralda!"

Slowly Esmeralda opened her eyes.  She saw Clayton.  She saw the jungle
about her.

"Oh, Gaberelle!" she screamed, and fainted again.

By this time Professor Porter and Mr. Philander had come up.

"What shall we do, Mr. Clayton?" asked the old professor.  "Where shall
we look?  God could not have been so cruel as to take my little girl
away from me now."

"We must arouse Esmeralda first," replied Clayton.  "She can tell us
what has happened.  Esmeralda!" he cried again, shaking the black woman
roughly by the shoulder.

"O Gaberelle, I want to die!" cried the poor woman, but with eyes fast
closed.  "Let me die, dear Lord, don't let me see that awful face
again."

"Come, come, Esmeralda," cried Clayton.

"The Lord isn't here; it's Mr. Clayton.  Open your eyes."

Esmeralda did as she was bade.

"O Gaberelle!  Thank the Lord," she said.

"Where's Miss Porter?  What happened?" questioned Clayton.

"Ain't Miss Jane here?" cried Esmeralda, sitting up with wonderful
celerity for one of her bulk.  "Oh, Lord, now I remember!  It must have
took her away," and the Negress commenced to sob, and wail her
lamentations.

"What took her away?" cried Professor Porter.

"A great big giant all covered with hair."

"A gorilla, Esmeralda?" questioned Mr. Philander, and the three men
scarcely breathed as he voiced the horrible thought.

"I thought it was the devil; but I guess it must have been one of them
gorilephants.  Oh, my poor baby, my poor little honey," and again
Esmeralda broke into uncontrollable sobbing.

Clayton immediately began to look about for tracks, but he could find
nothing save a confusion of trampled grasses in the close vicinity, and
his woodcraft was too meager for the translation of what he did see.

All the balance of the day they sought through the jungle; but as night
drew on they were forced to give up in despair and hopelessness, for
they did not even know in what direction the thing had borne Jane.

It was long after dark ere they reached the cabin, and a sad and
grief-stricken party it was that sat silently within the little
structure.

Professor Porter finally broke the silence.  His tones were no longer
those of the erudite pedant theorizing upon the abstract and the
unknowable; but those of the man of action--determined, but tinged also
by a note of indescribable hopelessness and grief which wrung an
answering pang from Clayton's heart.

"I shall lie down now," said the old man, "and try to sleep.  Early
to-morrow, as soon as it is light, I shall take what food I can carry
and continue the search until I have found Jane.  I will not return
without her."

His companions did not reply at once.  Each was immersed in his own
sorrowful thoughts, and each knew, as did the old professor, what the
last words meant--Professor Porter would never return from the jungle.

At length Clayton arose and laid his hand gently upon Professor
Porter's bent old shoulder.

"I shall go with you, of course," he said.

"I knew that you would offer--that you would wish to go, Mr. Clayton;
but you must not.  Jane is beyond human assistance now.  What was once
my dear little girl shall not lie alone and friendless in the awful
jungle.

"The same vines and leaves will cover us, the same rains beat upon us;
and when the spirit of her mother is abroad, it will find us together
in death, as it has always found us in life.

"No; it is I alone who may go, for she was my daughter--all that was
left on earth for me to love."

"I shall go with you," said Clayton simply.

The old man looked up, regarding the strong, handsome face of William
Cecil Clayton intently.  Perhaps he read there the love that lay in the
heart beneath--the love for his daughter.

He had been too preoccupied with his own scholarly thoughts in the past
to consider the little occurrences, the chance words, which would have
indicated to a more practical man that these young people were being
drawn more and more closely to one another.  Now they came back to him,
one by one.

"As you wish," he said.

"You may count on me, also," said Mr. Philander.

"No, my dear old friend," said Professor Porter.  "We may not all go.
It would be cruelly wicked to leave poor Esmeralda here alone, and
three of us would be no more successful than one.

"There be enough dead things in the cruel forest as it is.  Come--let
us try to sleep a little."




Chapter XIX

The Call of the Primitive


From the time Tarzan left the tribe of great anthropoids in which he
had been raised, it was torn by continual strife and discord.  Terkoz
proved a cruel and capricious king, so that, one by one, many of the
older and weaker apes, upon whom he was particularly prone to vent his
brutish nature, took their families and sought the quiet and safety of
the far interior.

But at last those who remained were driven to desperation by the
continued truculence of Terkoz, and it so happened that one of them
recalled the parting admonition of Tarzan:

"If you have a chief who is cruel, do not do as the other apes do, and
attempt, any one of you, to pit yourself against him alone.  But,
instead, let two or three or four of you attack him together.  Then, if
you will do this, no chief will dare to be other than he should be, for
four of you can kill any chief who may ever be over you."

And the ape who recalled this wise counsel repeated it to several of
his fellows, so that when Terkoz returned to the tribe that day he
found a warm reception awaiting him.

There were no formalities.  As Terkoz reached the group, five huge,
hairy beasts sprang upon him.

At heart he was an arrant coward, which is the way with bullies among
apes as well as among men; so he did not remain to fight and die, but
tore himself away from them as quickly as he could and fled into the
sheltering boughs of the forest.

Two more attempts he made to rejoin the tribe, but on each occasion he
was set upon and driven away.  At last he gave it up, and turned,
foaming with rage and hatred, into the jungle.

For several days he wandered aimlessly, nursing his spite and looking
for some weak thing on which to vent his pent anger.

It was in this state of mind that the horrible, man-like beast,
swinging from tree to tree, came suddenly upon two women in the jungle.

He was right above them when he discovered them.  The first intimation
Jane Porter had of his presence was when the great hairy body dropped
to the earth beside her, and she saw the awful face and the snarling,
hideous mouth thrust within a foot of her.

One piercing scream escaped her lips as the brute hand clutched her
arm.  Then she was dragged toward those awful fangs which yawned at her
throat.  But ere they touched that fair skin another mood claimed the
anthropoid.

The tribe had kept his women.  He must find others to replace them.
This hairless white ape would be the first of his new household, and so
he threw her roughly across his broad, hairy shoulders and leaped back
into the trees, bearing Jane away.

Esmeralda's scream of terror had mingled once with that of Jane, and
then, as was Esmeralda's manner under stress of emergency which
required presence of mind, she swooned.

But Jane did not once lose consciousness.  It is true that that awful
face, pressing close to hers, and the stench of the foul breath beating
upon her nostrils, paralyzed her with terror; but her brain was clear,
and she comprehended all that transpired.

With what seemed to her marvelous rapidity the brute bore her through
the forest, but still she did not cry out or struggle.  The sudden
advent of the ape had confused her to such an extent that she thought
now that he was bearing her toward the beach.

For this reason she conserved her energies and her voice until she
could see that they had approached near enough to the camp to attract
the succor she craved.

She could not have known it, but she was being borne farther and
farther into the impenetrable jungle.

The scream that had brought Clayton and the two older men stumbling
through the undergrowth had led Tarzan of the Apes straight to where
Esmeralda lay, but it was not Esmeralda in whom his interest centered,
though pausing over her he saw that she was unhurt.

For a moment he scrutinized the ground below and the trees above, until
the ape that was in him by virtue of training and environment, combined
with the intelligence that was his by right of birth, told his wondrous
woodcraft the whole story as plainly as though he had seen the thing
happen with his own eyes.

And then he was gone again into the swaying trees, following the
high-flung spoor which no other human eye could have detected, much
less translated.

At boughs' ends, where the anthropoid swings from one tree to another,
there is most to mark the trail, but least to point the direction of
the quarry; for there the pressure is downward always, toward the small
end of the branch, whether the ape be leaving or entering a tree.
Nearer the center of the tree, where the signs of passage are fainter,
the direction is plainly marked.

Here, on this branch, a caterpillar has been crushed by the fugitive's
great foot, and Tarzan knows instinctively where that same foot would
touch in the next stride.  Here he looks to find a tiny particle of the
demolished larva, ofttimes not more than a speck of moisture.

Again, a minute bit of bark has been upturned by the scraping hand, and
the direction of the break indicates the direction of the passage.  Or
some great limb, or the stem of the tree itself has been brushed by the
hairy body, and a tiny shred of hair tells him by the direction from
which it is wedged beneath the bark that he is on the right trail.

Nor does he need to check his speed to catch these seemingly faint
records of the fleeing beast.

To Tarzan they stand out boldly against all the myriad other scars and
bruises and signs upon the leafy way.  But strongest of all is the
scent, for Tarzan is pursuing up the wind, and his trained nostrils are
as sensitive as a hound's.

There are those who believe that the lower orders are specially endowed
by nature with better olfactory nerves than man, but it is merely a
matter of development.

Man's survival does not hinge so greatly upon the perfection of his
senses.  His power to reason has relieved them of many of their duties,
and so they have, to some extent, atrophied, as have the muscles which
move the ears and scalp, merely from disuse.

The muscles are there, about the ears and beneath the scalp, and so are
the nerves which transmit sensations to the brain, but they are
under-developed because they are not needed.

Not so with Tarzan of the Apes.  From early infancy his survival had
depended upon acuteness of eyesight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste
far more than upon the more slowly developed organ of reason.

The least developed of all in Tarzan was the sense of taste, for he
could eat luscious fruits, or raw flesh, long buried with almost equal
appreciation; but in that he differed but slightly from more civilized
epicures.

Almost silently the ape-man sped on in the track of Terkoz and his
prey, but the sound of his approach reached the ears of the fleeing
beast and spurred it on to greater speed.

Three miles were covered before Tarzan overtook them, and then Terkoz,
seeing that further flight was futile, dropped to the ground in a small
open glade, that he might turn and fight for his prize or be free to
escape unhampered if he saw that the pursuer was more than a match for
him.

He still grasped Jane in one great arm as Tarzan bounded like a leopard
into the arena which nature had provided for this primeval-like battle.

When Terkoz saw that it was Tarzan who pursued him, he jumped to the
conclusion that this was Tarzan's woman, since they were of the same
kind--white and hairless--and so he rejoiced at this opportunity for
double revenge upon his hated enemy.

To Jane the strange apparition of this god-like man was as wine to sick
nerves.

From the description which Clayton and her father and Mr. Philander had
given her, she knew that it must be the same wonderful creature who had
saved them, and she saw in him only a protector and a friend.

But as Terkoz pushed her roughly aside to meet Tarzan's charge, and she
saw the great proportions of the ape and the mighty muscles and the
fierce fangs, her heart quailed.  How could any vanquish such a mighty
antagonist?

Like two charging bulls they came together, and like two wolves sought
each other's throat.  Against the long canines of the ape was pitted
the thin blade of the man's knife.

Jane--her lithe, young form flattened against the trunk of a great
tree, her hands tight pressed against her rising and falling bosom, and
her eyes wide with mingled horror, fascination, fear, and
admiration--watched the primordial ape battle with the primeval man for
possession of a woman--for her.

As the great muscles of the man's back and shoulders knotted beneath
the tension of his efforts, and the huge biceps and forearm held at bay
those mighty tusks, the veil of centuries of civilization and culture
was swept from the blurred vision of the Baltimore girl.

When the long knife drank deep a dozen times of Terkoz' heart's blood,
and the great carcass rolled lifeless upon the ground, it was a
primeval woman who sprang forward with outstretched arms toward the
primeval man who had fought for her and won her.

And Tarzan?

He did what no red-blooded man needs lessons in doing.  He took his
woman in his arms and smothered her upturned, panting lips with kisses.

For a moment Jane lay there with half-closed eyes.  For a moment--the
first in her young life--she knew the meaning of love.

But as suddenly as the veil had been withdrawn it dropped again, and an
outraged conscience suffused her face with its scarlet mantle, and a
mortified woman thrust Tarzan of the Apes from her and buried her face
in her hands.

Tarzan had been surprised when he had found the girl he had learned to
love after a vague and abstract manner a willing prisoner in his arms.
Now he was surprised that she repulsed him.

He came close to her once more and took hold of her arm.  She turned
upon him like a tigress, striking his great breast with her tiny hands.

Tarzan could not understand it.

A moment ago and it had been his intention to hasten Jane back to her
people, but that little moment was lost now in the dim and distant past
of things which were but can never be again, and with it the good
intentions had gone to join the impossible.

Since then Tarzan of the Apes had felt a warm, lithe form close pressed
to his.  Hot, sweet breath against his cheek and mouth had fanned a new
flame to life within his breast, and perfect lips had clung to his in
burning kisses that had seared a deep brand into his soul--a brand
which marked a new Tarzan.

Again he laid his hand upon her arm.  Again she repulsed him.  And then
Tarzan of the Apes did just what his first ancestor would have done.

He took his woman in his arms and carried her into the jungle.


Early the following morning the four within the little cabin by the
beach were awakened by the booming of a cannon.  Clayton was the first
to rush out, and there, beyond the harbor's mouth, he saw two vessels
lying at anchor.

One was the Arrow and the other a small French cruiser.  The sides of
the latter were crowded with men gazing shoreward, and it was evident
to Clayton, as to the others who had now joined him, that the gun which
they had heard had been fired to attract their attention if they still
remained at the cabin.

Both vessels lay at a considerable distance from shore, and it was
doubtful if their glasses would locate the waving hats of the little
party far in between the harbor's points.

Esmeralda had removed her red apron and was waving it frantically above
her head; but Clayton, still fearing that even this might not be seen,
hurried off toward the northern point where lay his signal pyre ready
for the match.

It seemed an age to him, as to those who waited breathlessly behind,
ere he reached the great pile of dry branches and underbrush.

As he broke from the dense wood and came in sight of the vessels again,
he was filled with consternation to see that the Arrow was making sail
and that the cruiser was already under way.

Quickly lighting the pyre in a dozen places, he hurried to the extreme
point of the promontory, where he stripped off his shirt, and, tying it
to a fallen branch, stood waving it back and forth above him.

But still the vessels continued to stand out; and he had given up all
hope, when the great column of smoke, rising above the forest in one
dense vertical shaft, attracted the attention of a lookout aboard the
cruiser, and instantly a dozen glasses were leveled on the beach.

Presently Clayton saw the two ships come about again; and while the
Arrow lay drifting quietly on the ocean, the cruiser steamed slowly
back toward shore.

At some distance away she stopped, and a boat was lowered and
dispatched toward the beach.

As it was drawn up a young officer stepped out.

"Monsieur Clayton, I presume?" he asked.

"Thank God, you have come!" was Clayton's reply.  "And it may be that
it is not too late even now."

"What do you mean, Monsieur?" asked the officer.

Clayton told of the abduction of Jane Porter and the need of armed men
to aid in the search for her.

"MON DIEU!" exclaimed the officer, sadly.  "Yesterday and it would not
have been too late.  Today and it may be better that the poor lady were
never found.  It is horrible, Monsieur.  It is too horrible."

Other boats had now put off from the cruiser, and Clayton, having
pointed out the harbor's entrance to the officer, entered the boat with
him and its nose was turned toward the little landlocked bay, into
which the other craft followed.

Soon the entire party had landed where stood Professor Porter, Mr.
Philander and the weeping Esmeralda.

Among the officers in the last boats to put off from the cruiser was
the commander of the vessel; and when he had heard the story of Jane's
abduction, he generously called for volunteers to accompany Professor
Porter and Clayton in their search.

Not an officer or a man was there of those brave and sympathetic
Frenchmen who did not quickly beg leave to be one of the expedition.

The commander selected twenty men and two officers, Lieutenant D'Arnot
and Lieutenant Charpentier.  A boat was dispatched to the cruiser for
provisions, ammunition, and carbines; the men were already armed with
revolvers.

Then, to Clayton's inquiries as to how they had happened to anchor off
shore and fire a signal gun, the commander, Captain Dufranne, explained
that a month before they had sighted the Arrow bearing southwest under
considerable canvas, and that when they had signaled her to come about
she had but crowded on more sail.

They had kept her hull-up until sunset, firing several shots after her,
but the next morning she was nowhere to be seen.  They had then
continued to cruise up and down the coast for several weeks, and had
about forgotten the incident of the recent chase, when, early one
morning a few days before the lookout had described a vessel laboring
in the trough of a heavy sea and evidently entirely out of control.

As they steamed nearer to the derelict they were surprised to note that
it was the same vessel that had run from them a few weeks earlier.  Her
forestaysail and mizzen spanker were set as though an effort had been
made to hold her head up into the wind, but the sheets had parted, and
the sails were tearing to ribbons in the half gale of wind.

In the high sea that was running it was a difficult and dangerous task
to attempt to put a prize crew aboard her; and as no signs of life had
been seen above deck, it was decided to stand by until the wind and sea
abated; but just then a figure was seen clinging to the rail and feebly
waving a mute signal of despair toward them.

Immediately a boat's crew was ordered out and an attempt was
successfully made to board the Arrow.

The sight that met the Frenchmen's eyes as they clambered over the
ship's side was appalling.

A dozen dead and dying men rolled hither and thither upon the pitching
deck, the living intermingled with the dead.  Two of the corpses
appeared to have been partially devoured as though by wolves.

The prize crew soon had the vessel under proper sail once more and the
living members of the ill-starred company carried below to their
hammocks.

The dead were wrapped in tarpaulins and lashed on deck to be identified
by their comrades before being consigned to the deep.

None of the living was conscious when the Frenchmen reached the Arrow's
deck.  Even the poor devil who had waved the single despairing signal
of distress had lapsed into unconsciousness before he had learned
whether it had availed or not.

It did not take the French officer long to learn what had caused the
terrible condition aboard; for when water and brandy were sought to
restore the men, it was found that there was none, nor even food of any
description.

He immediately signalled to the cruiser to send water, medicine, and
provisions, and another boat made the perilous trip to the Arrow.

When restoratives had been applied several of the men regained
consciousness, and then the whole story was told.  That part of it we
know up to the sailing of the Arrow after the murder of Snipes, and the
burial of his body above the treasure chest.

It seems that the pursuit by the cruiser had so terrorized the
mutineers that they had continued out across the Atlantic for several
days after losing her; but on discovering the meager supply of water
and provisions aboard, they had turned back toward the east.

With no one on board who understood navigation, discussions soon arose
as to their whereabouts; and as three days' sailing to the east did not
raise land, they bore off to the north, fearing that the high north
winds that had prevailed had driven them south of the southern
extremity of Africa.

They kept on a north-northeasterly course for two days, when they were
overtaken by a calm which lasted for nearly a week.  Their water was
gone, and in another day they would be without food.

Conditions changed rapidly from bad to worse.  One man went mad and
leaped overboard.  Soon another opened his veins and drank his own
blood.

When he died they threw him overboard also, though there were those
among them who wanted to keep the corpse on board.  Hunger was changing
them from human beasts to wild beasts.

Two days before they had been picked up by the cruiser they had become
too weak to handle the vessel, and that same day three men died.  On
the following morning it was seen that one of the corpses had been
partially devoured.

All that day the men lay glaring at each other like beasts of prey, and
the following morning two of the corpses lay almost entirely stripped
of flesh.

The men were but little stronger for their ghoulish repast, for the
want of water was by far the greatest agony with which they had to
contend.  And then the cruiser had come.

When those who could had recovered, the entire story had been told to
the French commander; but the men were too ignorant to be able to tell
him at just what point on the coast the professor and his party had
been marooned, so the cruiser had steamed slowly along within sight of
land, firing occasional signal guns and scanning every inch of the
beach with glasses.

They had anchored by night so as not to neglect a particle of the shore
line, and it had happened that the preceding night had brought them off
the very beach where lay the little camp they sought.

The signal guns of the afternoon before had not been heard by those on
shore, it was presumed, because they had doubtless been in the thick of
the jungle searching for Jane Porter, where the noise of their own
crashing through the underbrush would have drowned the report of a far
distant gun.

By the time the two parties had narrated their several adventures, the
cruiser's boat had returned with supplies and arms for the expedition.

Within a few minutes the little body of sailors and the two French
officers, together with Professor Porter and Clayton, set off upon
their hopeless and ill-fated quest into the untracked jungle.




Chapter XX

Heredity


When Jane realized that she was being borne away a captive by the
strange forest creature who had rescued her from the clutches of the
ape she struggled desperately to escape, but the strong arms that held
her as easily as though she had been but a day-old babe only pressed a
little more tightly.

So presently she gave up the futile effort and lay quietly, looking
through half-closed lids at the face of the man who strode easily
through the tangled undergrowth with her.

The face above her was one of extraordinary beauty.

A perfect type of the strongly masculine, unmarred by dissipation, or
brutal or degrading passions.  For, though Tarzan of the Apes was a
killer of men and of beasts, he killed as the hunter kills,
dispassionately, except on those rare occasions when he had killed for
hate--though not the brooding, malevolent hate which marks the features
of its own with hideous lines.

When Tarzan killed he more often smiled than scowled, and smiles are
the foundation of beauty.

One thing the girl had noticed particularly when she had seen Tarzan
rushing upon Terkoz--the vivid scarlet band upon his forehead, from
above the left eye to the scalp; but now as she scanned his features
she noticed that it was gone, and only a thin white line marked the
spot where it had been.

As she lay more quietly in his arms Tarzan slightly relaxed his grip
upon her.

Once he looked down into her eyes and smiled, and the girl had to close
her own to shut out the vision of that handsome, winning face.

Presently Tarzan took to the trees, and Jane, wondering that she felt
no fear, began to realize that in many respects she had never felt more
secure in her whole life than now as she lay in the arms of this
strong, wild creature, being borne, God alone knew where or to what
fate, deeper and deeper into the savage fastness of the untamed forest.

When, with closed eyes, she commenced to speculate upon the future, and
terrifying fears were conjured by a vivid imagination, she had but to
raise her lids and look upon that noble face so close to hers to
dissipate the last remnant of apprehension.

No, he could never harm her; of that she was convinced when she
translated the fine features and the frank, brave eyes above her into
the chivalry which they proclaimed.

On and on they went through what seemed to Jane a solid mass of
verdure, yet ever there appeared to open before this forest god a
passage, as by magic, which closed behind them as they passed.

Scarce a branch scraped against her, yet above and below, before and
behind, the view presented naught but a solid mass of inextricably
interwoven branches and creepers.

As Tarzan moved steadily onward his mind was occupied with many strange
and new thoughts.  Here was a problem the like of which he had never
encountered, and he felt rather than reasoned that he must meet it as a
man and not as an ape.

The free movement through the middle terrace, which was the route he
had followed for the most part, had helped to cool the ardor of the
first fierce passion of his new found love.

Now he discovered himself speculating upon the fate which would have
fallen to the girl had he not rescued her from Terkoz.

He knew why the ape had not killed her, and he commenced to compare his
intentions with those of Terkoz.

True, it was the order of the jungle for the male to take his mate by
force; but could Tarzan be guided by the laws of the beasts?  Was not
Tarzan a Man?  But what did men do?  He was puzzled; for he did not
know.

He wished that he might ask the girl, and then it came to him that she
had already answered him in the futile struggle she had made to escape
and to repulse him.

But now they had come to their destination, and Tarzan of the Apes with
Jane in his strong arms, swung lightly to the turf of the arena where
the great apes held their councils and danced the wild orgy of the
Dum-Dum.

Though they had come many miles, it was still but midafternoon, and the
amphitheater was bathed in the half light which filtered through the
maze of encircling foliage.

The green turf looked soft and cool and inviting.  The myriad noises of
the jungle seemed far distant and hushed to a mere echo of blurred
sounds, rising and falling like the surf upon a remote shore.

A feeling of dreamy peacefulness stole over Jane as she sank down upon
the grass where Tarzan had placed her, and as she looked up at his
great figure towering above her, there was added a strange sense of
perfect security.

As she watched him from beneath half-closed lids, Tarzan crossed the
little circular clearing toward the trees upon the further side.  She
noted the graceful majesty of his carriage, the perfect symmetry of his
magnificent figure and the poise of his well-shaped head upon his broad
shoulders.

What a perfect creature!  There could be naught of cruelty or baseness
beneath that godlike exterior.  Never, she thought had such a man
strode the earth since God created the first in his own image.

With a bound Tarzan sprang into the trees and disappeared.  Jane
wondered where he had gone.  Had he left her there to her fate in the
lonely jungle?

She glanced nervously about.  Every vine and bush seemed but the
lurking-place of some huge and horrible beast waiting to bury gleaming
fangs into her soft flesh.  Every sound she magnified into the stealthy
creeping of a sinuous and malignant body.

How different now that he had left her!

For a few minutes that seemed hours to the frightened girl, she sat
with tense nerves waiting for the spring of the crouching thing that
was to end her misery of apprehension.

She almost prayed for the cruel teeth that would give her
unconsciousness and surcease from the agony of fear.

She heard a sudden, slight sound behind her.  With a cry she sprang to
her feet and turned to face her end.

There stood Tarzan, his arms filled with ripe and luscious fruit.

Jane reeled and would have fallen, had not Tarzan, dropping his burden,
caught her in his arms.  She did not lose consciousness, but she clung
tightly to him, shuddering and trembling like a frightened deer.

Tarzan of the Apes stroked her soft hair and tried to comfort and quiet
her as Kala had him, when, as a little ape, he had been frightened by
Sabor, the lioness, or Histah, the snake.

Once he pressed his lips lightly upon her forehead, and she did not
move, but closed her eyes and sighed.

She could not analyze her feelings, nor did she wish to attempt it.
She was satisfied to feel the safety of those strong arms, and to leave
her future to fate; for the last few hours had taught her to trust this
strange wild creature of the forest as she would have trusted but few
of the men of her acquaintance.

As she thought of the strangeness of it, there commenced to dawn upon
her the realization that she had, possibly, learned something else
which she had never really known before--love.  She wondered and then
she smiled.

And still smiling, she pushed Tarzan gently away; and looking at him
with a half-smiling, half-quizzical expression that made her face
wholly entrancing, she pointed to the fruit upon the ground, and seated
herself upon the edge of the earthen drum of the anthropoids, for
hunger was asserting itself.

Tarzan quickly gathered up the fruit, and, bringing it, laid it at her
feet; and then he, too, sat upon the drum beside her, and with his
knife opened and prepared the various fruits for her meal.

Together and in silence they ate, occasionally stealing sly glances at
one another, until finally Jane broke into a merry laugh in which
Tarzan joined.

"I wish you spoke English," said the girl.

Tarzan shook his head, and an expression of wistful and pathetic
longing sobered his laughing eyes.

Then Jane tried speaking to him in French, and then in German; but she
had to laugh at her own blundering attempt at the latter tongue.

"Anyway," she said to him in English, "you understand my German as well
as they did in Berlin."

Tarzan had long since reached a decision as to what his future
procedure should be.  He had had time to recollect all that he had read
of the ways of men and women in the books at the cabin.  He would act
as he imagined the men in the books would have acted were they in his
place.

Again he rose and went into the trees, but first he tried to explain by
means of signs that he would return shortly, and he did so well that
Jane understood and was not afraid when he had gone.

Only a feeling of loneliness came over her and she watched the point
where he had disappeared, with longing eyes, awaiting his return.  As
before, she was appraised of his presence by a soft sound behind her,
and turned to see him coming across the turf with a great armful of
branches.

Then he went back again into the jungle and in a few minutes reappeared
with a quantity of soft grasses and ferns.

Two more trips he made until he had quite a pile of material at hand.

Then he spread the ferns and grasses upon the ground in a soft flat
bed, and above it leaned many branches together so that they met a few
feet over its center.  Upon these he spread layers of huge leaves of
the great elephant's ear, and with more branches and more leaves he
closed one end of the little shelter he had built.

Then they sat down together again upon the edge of the drum and tried
to talk by signs.

The magnificent diamond locket which hung about Tarzan's neck, had been
a source of much wonderment to Jane.  She pointed to it now, and Tarzan
removed it and handed the pretty bauble to her.

She saw that it was the work of a skilled artisan and that the diamonds
were of great brilliancy and superbly set, but the cutting of them
denoted that they were of a former day.  She noticed too that the
locket opened, and, pressing the hidden clasp, she saw the two halves
spring apart to reveal in either section an ivory miniature.

One was of a beautiful woman and the other might have been a likeness
of the man who sat beside her, except for a subtle difference of
expression that was scarcely definable.

She looked up at Tarzan to find him leaning toward her gazing on the
miniatures with an expression of astonishment.  He reached out his hand
for the locket and took it away from her, examining the likenesses
within with unmistakable signs of surprise and new interest.  His
manner clearly denoted that he had never before seen them, nor imagined
that the locket opened.

This fact caused Jane to indulge in further speculation, and it taxed
her imagination to picture how this beautiful ornament came into the
possession of a wild and savage creature of the unexplored jungles of
Africa.

Still more wonderful was how it contained the likeness of one who might
be a brother, or, more likely, the father of this woodland demi-god who
was even ignorant of the fact that the locket opened.

Tarzan was still gazing with fixity at the two faces.  Presently he
removed the quiver from his shoulder, and emptying the arrows upon the
ground reached into the bottom of the bag-like receptacle and drew
forth a flat object wrapped in many soft leaves and tied with bits of
long grass.

Carefully he unwrapped it, removing layer after layer of leaves until
at length he held a photograph in his hand.

Pointing to the miniature of the man within the locket he handed the
photograph to Jane, holding the open locket beside it.

The photograph only served to puzzle the girl still more, for it was
evidently another likeness of the same man whose picture rested in the
locket beside that of the beautiful young woman.

Tarzan was looking at her with an expression of puzzled bewilderment in
his eyes as she glanced up at him.  He seemed to be framing a question
with his lips.

The girl pointed to the photograph and then to the miniature and then
to him, as though to indicate that she thought the likenesses were of
him, but he only shook his head, and then shrugging his great
shoulders, he took the photograph from her and having carefully
rewrapped it, placed it again in the bottom of his quiver.

For a few moments he sat in silence, his eyes bent upon the ground,
while Jane held the little locket in her hand, turning it over and over
in an endeavor to find some further clue that might lead to the
identity of its original owner.

At length a simple explanation occurred to her.

The locket had belonged to Lord Greystoke, and the likenesses were of
himself and Lady Alice.

This wild creature had simply found it in the cabin by the beach.  How
stupid of her not to have thought of that solution before.

But to account for the strange likeness between Lord Greystoke and this
forest god--that was quite beyond her, and it is not strange that she
could not imagine that this naked savage was indeed an English nobleman.

At length Tarzan looked up to watch the girl as she examined the
locket.  He could not fathom the meaning of the faces within, but he
could read the interest and fascination upon the face of the live young
creature by his side.

She noticed that he was watching her and thinking that he wished his
ornament again she held it out to him.  He took it from her and taking
the chain in his two hands he placed it about her neck, smiling at her
expression of surprise at his unexpected gift.

Jane shook her head vehemently and would have removed the golden links
from about her throat, but Tarzan would not let her.  Taking her hands
in his, when she insisted upon it, he held them tightly to prevent her.

At last she desisted and with a little laugh raised the locket to her
lips.

Tarzan did not know precisely what she meant, but he guessed correctly
that it was her way of acknowledging the gift, and so he rose, and
taking the locket in his hand, stooped gravely like some courtier of
old, and pressed his lips upon it where hers had rested.

It was a stately and gallant little compliment performed with the grace
and dignity of utter unconsciousness of self.  It was the hall-mark of
his aristocratic birth, the natural outcropping of many generations of
fine breeding, an hereditary instinct of graciousness which a lifetime
of uncouth and savage training and environment could not eradicate.

It was growing dark now, and so they ate again of the fruit which was
both food and drink for them; then Tarzan rose, and leading Jane to the
little bower he had erected, motioned her to go within.

For the first time in hours a feeling of fear swept over her, and
Tarzan felt her draw away as though shrinking from him.

Contact with this girl for half a day had left a very diferent Tarzan
from the one on whom the morning's sun had risen.

Now, in every fiber of his being, heredity spoke louder than training.

He had not in one swift transition become a polished gentleman from a
savage ape-man, but at last the instincts of the former predominated,
and over all was the desire to please the woman he loved, and to appear
well in her eyes.

So Tarzan of the Apes did the only thing he knew to assure Jane of her
safety.  He removed his hunting knife from its sheath and handed it to
her hilt first, again motioning her into the bower.

The girl understood, and taking the long knife she entered and lay down
upon the soft grasses while Tarzan of the Apes stretched himself upon
the ground across the entrance.

And thus the rising sun found them in the morning.

When Jane awoke, she did not at first recall the strange events of the
preceding day, and so she wondered at her odd surroundings--the little
leafy bower, the soft grasses of her bed, the unfamiliar prospect from
the opening at her feet.

Slowly the circumstances of her position crept one by one into her
mind.  And then a great wonderment arose in her heart--a mighty wave of
thankfulness and gratitude that though she had been in such terrible
danger, yet she was unharmed.

She moved to the entrance of the shelter to look for Tarzan.  He was
gone; but this time no fear assailed her for she knew that he would
return.

In the grass at the entrance to her bower she saw the imprint of his
body where he had lain all night to guard her.  She knew that the fact
that he had been there was all that had permitted her to sleep in such
peaceful security.

With him near, who could entertain fear?  She wondered if there was
another man on earth with whom a girl could feel so safe in the heart
of this savage African jungle.  Even the lions and panthers had no
fears for her now.

She looked up to see his lithe form drop softly from a near-by tree.
As he caught her eyes upon him his face lighted with that frank and
radiant smile that had won her confidence the day before.

As he approached her Jane's heart beat faster and her eyes brightened
as they had never done before at the approach of any man.

He had again been gathering fruit and this he laid at the entrance of
her bower.  Once more they sat down together to eat.

Jane commenced to wonder what his plans were.  Would he take her back
to the beach or would he keep her here?  Suddenly she realized that the
matter did not seem to give her much concern.  Could it be that she did
not care!

She began to comprehend, also, that she was entirely contented sitting
here by the side of this smiling giant eating delicious fruit in a
sylvan paradise far within the remote depths of an African jungle--that
she was contented and very happy.

She could not understand it.  Her reason told her that she should be
torn by wild anxieties, weighted by dread fears, cast down by gloomy
forebodings; but instead, her heart was singing and she was smiling
into the answering face of the man beside her.

When they had finished their breakfast Tarzan went to her bower and
recovered his knife.  The girl had entirely forgotten it.  She realized
that it was because she had forgotten the fear that prompted her to
accept it.

Motioning her to follow, Tarzan walked toward the trees at the edge of
the arena, and taking her in one strong arm swung to the branches above.

The girl knew that he was taking her back to her people, and she could
not understand the sudden feeling of loneliness and sorrow which crept
over her.

For hours they swung slowly along.

Tarzan of the Apes did not hurry.  He tried to draw out the sweet
pleasure of that journey with those dear arms about his neck as long as
possible, and so he went far south of the direct route to the beach.

Several times they halted for brief rests, which Tarzan did not need,
and at noon they stopped for an hour at a little brook, where they
quenched their thirst, and ate.

So it was nearly sunset when they came to the clearing, and Tarzan,
dropping to the ground beside a great tree, parted the tall jungle
grass and pointed out the little cabin to her.

She took him by the hand to lead him to it, that she might tell her
father that this man had saved her from death and worse than death,
that he had watched over her as carefully as a mother might have done.

But again the timidity of the wild thing in the face of human
habitation swept over Tarzan of the Apes.  He drew back, shaking his
head.

The girl came close to him, looking up with pleading eyes.  Somehow she
could not bear the thought of his going back into the terrible jungle
alone.

Still he shook his head, and finally he drew her to him very gently and
stooped to kiss her, but first he looked into her eyes and waited to
learn if she were pleased, or if she would repulse him.

Just an instant the girl hesitated, and then she realized the truth,
and throwing her arms about his neck she drew his face to hers and
kissed him--unashamed.

"I love you--I love you," she murmured.

From far in the distance came the faint sound of many guns.  Tarzan and
Jane raised their heads.

From the cabin came Mr. Philander and Esmeralda.

From where Tarzan and the girl stood they could not see the two vessels
lying at anchor in the harbor.

Tarzan pointed toward the sounds, touched his breast and pointed again.
She understood.  He was going, and something told her that it was
because he thought her people were in danger.

Again he kissed her.

"Come back to me," she whispered.  "I shall wait for you--always."

He was gone--and Jane turned to walk across the clearing to the cabin.

Mr. Philander was the first to see her.  It was dusk and Mr. Philander
was very near sighted.

"Quickly, Esmeralda!" he cried.  "Let us seek safety within; it is a
lioness.  Bless me!"

Esmeralda did not bother to verify Mr. Philander's vision.  His tone
was enough.  She was within the cabin and had slammed and bolted the
door before he had finished pronouncing her name.  The "Bless me" was
startled out of Mr. Philander by the discovery that Esmeralda, in the
exuberance of her haste, had fastened him upon the same side of the
door as was the close-approaching lioness.

He beat furiously upon the heavy portal.

"Esmeralda!  Esmeralda!" he shrieked.  "Let me in.  I am being devoured
by a lion."

Esmeralda thought that the noise upon the door was made by the lioness
in her attempts to pursue her, so, after her custom, she fainted.

Mr. Philander cast a frightened glance behind him.

Horrors!  The thing was quite close now.  He tried to scramble up the
side of the cabin, and succeeded in catching a fleeting hold upon the
thatched roof.

For a moment he hung there, clawing with his feet like a cat on a
clothesline, but presently a piece of the thatch came away, and Mr.
Philander, preceding it, was precipitated upon his back.

At the instant he fell a remarkable item of natural history leaped to
his mind.  If one feigns death lions and lionesses are supposed to
ignore one, according to Mr. Philander's faulty memory.

So Mr. Philander lay as he had fallen, frozen into the horrid semblance
of death.  As his arms and legs had been extended stiffly upward as he
came to earth upon his back the attitude of death was anything but
impressive.

Jane had been watching his antics in mild-eyed surprise.  Now she
laughed--a little choking gurgle of a laugh; but it was enough.  Mr.
Philander rolled over upon his side and peered about.  At length he
discovered her.

"Jane!" he cried.  "Jane Porter.  Bless me!"

He scrambled to his feet and rushed toward her.  He could not believe
that it was she, and alive.

"Bless me!"  Where did you come from?  Where in the world have you
been?  How--"

"Mercy, Mr. Philander," interrupted the girl, "I can never remember so
many questions."

"Well, well," said Mr. Philander.  "Bless me!  I am so filled with
surprise and exuberant delight at seeing you safe and well again that I
scarcely know what I am saying, really.  But come, tell me all that has
happened to you."




Chapter XXI

The Village of Torture


As the little expedition of sailors toiled through the dense jungle
searching for signs of Jane Porter, the futility of their venture
became more and more apparent, but the grief of the old man and the
hopeless eyes of the young Englishman prevented the kind hearted
D'Arnot from turning back.

He thought that there might be a bare possibility of finding her body,
or the remains of it, for he was positive that she had been devoured by
some beast of prey.  He deployed his men into a skirmish line from the
point where Esmeralda had been found, and in this extended formation
they pushed their way, sweating and panting, through the tangled vines
and creepers.  It was slow work.  Noon found them but a few miles
inland.  They halted for a brief rest then, and after pushing on for a
short distance further one of the men discovered a well-marked trail.

It was an old elephant track, and D'Arnot after consulting with
Professor Porter and Clayton decided to follow it.

The path wound through the jungle in a northeasterly direction, and
along it the column moved in single file.

Lieutenant D'Arnot was in the lead and moving at a quick pace, for the
trail was comparatively open.  Immediately behind him came Professor
Porter, but as he could not keep pace with the younger man D'Arnot was
a hundred yards in advance when suddenly a half dozen black warriors
arose about him.

D'Arnot gave a warning shout to his column as the blacks closed on him,
but before he could draw his revolver he had been pinioned and dragged
into the jungle.

His cry had alarmed the sailors and a dozen of them sprang forward past
Professor Porter, running up the trail to their officer's aid.

They did not know the cause of his outcry, only that it was a warning
of danger ahead.  They had rushed past the spot where D'Arnot had been
seized when a spear hurled from the jungle transfixed one of the men,
and then a volley of arrows fell among them.

Raising their rifles they fired into the underbrush in the direction
from which the missiles had come.

By this time the balance of the party had come up, and volley after
volley was fired toward the concealed foe.  It was these shots that
Tarzan and Jane Porter had heard.

Lieutenant Charpentier, who had been bringing up the rear of the
column, now came running to the scene, and on hearing the details of
the ambush ordered the men to follow him, and plunged into the tangled
vegetation.

In an instant they were in a hand-to-hand fight with some fifty black
warriors of Mbonga's village.  Arrows and bullets flew thick and fast.

Queer African knives and French gun butts mingled for a moment in
savage and bloody duels, but soon the natives fled into the jungle,
leaving the Frenchmen to count their losses.

Four of the twenty were dead, a dozen others were wounded, and
Lieutenant D'Arnot was missing.  Night was falling rapidly, and their
predicament was rendered doubly worse when they could not even find the
elephant trail which they had been following.

There was but one thing to do, make camp where they were until
daylight.  Lieutenant Charpentier ordered a clearing made and a
circular abatis of underbrush constructed about the camp.

This work was not completed until long after dark, the men building a
huge fire in the center of the clearing to give them light to work by.

When all was safe as possible against attack of wild beasts and savage
men, Lieutenant Charpentier placed sentries about the little camp and
the tired and hungry men threw themselves upon the ground to sleep.

The groans of the wounded, mingled with the roaring and growling of the
great beasts which the noise and firelight had attracted, kept sleep,
except in its most fitful form, from the tired eyes.  It was a sad and
hungry party that lay through the long night praying for dawn.

The blacks who had seized D'Arnot had not waited to participate in the
fight which followed, but instead had dragged their prisoner a little
way through the jungle and then struck the trail further on beyond the
scene of the fighting in which their fellows were engaged.

They hurried him along, the sounds of battle growing fainter and
fainter as they drew away from the contestants until there suddenly
broke upon D'Arnot's vision a good-sized clearing at one end of which
stood a thatched and palisaded village.

It was now dusk, but the watchers at the gate saw the approaching trio
and distinguished one as a prisoner ere they reached the portals.

A cry went up within the palisade.  A great throng of women and
children rushed out to meet the party.

And then began for the French officer the most terrifying experience
which man can encounter upon earth--the reception of a white prisoner
into a village of African cannibals.

To add to the fiendishness of their cruel savagery was the poignant
memory of still crueler barbarities practiced upon them and theirs by
the white officers of that arch hypocrite, Leopold II of Belgium,
because of whose atrocities they had fled the Congo Free State--a
pitiful remnant of what once had been a mighty tribe.

They fell upon D'Arnot tooth and nail, beating him with sticks and
stones and tearing at him with claw-like hands.  Every vestige of
clothing was torn from him, and the merciless blows fell upon his bare
and quivering flesh.  But not once did the Frenchman cry out in pain.
He breathed a silent prayer that he be quickly delivered from his
torture.

But the death he prayed for was not to be so easily had.  Soon the
warriors beat the women away from their prisoner.  He was to be saved
for nobler sport than this, and the first wave of their passion having
subsided they contented themselves with crying out taunts and insults
and spitting upon him.

Presently they reached the center of the village.  There D'Arnot was
bound securely to the great post from which no live man had ever been
released.

A number of the women scattered to their several huts to fetch pots and
water, while others built a row of fires on which portions of the feast
were to be boiled while the balance would be slowly dried in strips for
future use, as they expected the other warriors to return with many
prisoners.  The festivities were delayed awaiting the return of the
warriors who had remained to engage in the skirmish with the white men,
so that it was quite late when all were in the village, and the dance
of death commenced to circle around the doomed officer.

Half fainting from pain and exhaustion, D'Arnot watched from beneath
half-closed lids what seemed but the vagary of delirium, or some horrid
nightmare from which he must soon awake.

The bestial faces, daubed with color--the huge mouths and flabby
hanging lips--the yellow teeth, sharp filed--the rolling, demon
eyes--the shining naked bodies--the cruel spears.  Surely no such
creatures really existed upon earth--he must indeed be dreaming.

The savage, whirling bodies circled nearer.  Now a spear sprang forth
and touched his arm.  The sharp pain and the feel of hot, trickling
blood assured him of the awful reality of his hopeless position.

Another spear and then another touched him.  He closed his eyes and
held his teeth firm set--he would not cry out.

He was a soldier of France, and he would teach these beasts how an
officer and a gentleman died.


Tarzan of the Apes needed no interpreter to translate the story of
those distant shots.  With Jane Porter's kisses still warm upon his
lips he was swinging with incredible rapidity through the forest trees
straight toward the village of Mbonga.

He was not interested in the location of the encounter, for he judged
that that would soon be over.  Those who were killed he could not aid,
those who escaped would not need his assistance.

It was to those who had neither been killed or escaped that he
hastened.  And he knew that he would find them by the great post in the
center of Mbonga village.

Many times had Tarzan seen Mbonga's black raiding parties return from
the northward with prisoners, and always were the same scenes enacted
about that grim stake, beneath the flaring light of many fires.

He knew, too, that they seldom lost much time before consummating the
fiendish purpose of their captures.  He doubted that he would arrive in
time to do more than avenge.

On he sped.  Night had fallen and he traveled high along the upper
terrace where the gorgeous tropic moon lighted the dizzy pathway
through the gently undulating branches of the tree tops.

Presently he caught the reflection of a distant blaze.  It lay to the
right of his path.  It must be the light from the camp fire the two men
had built before they were attacked--Tarzan knew nothing of the
presence of the sailors.

So sure was Tarzan of his jungle knowledge that he did not turn from
his course, but passed the glare at a distance of a half mile.  It was
the camp fire of the Frenchmen.

In a few minutes more Tarzan swung into the trees above Mbonga's
village.  Ah, he was not quite too late!  Or, was he?  He could not
tell.  The figure at the stake was very still, yet the black warriors
were but pricking it.

Tarzan knew their customs.  The death blow had not been struck.  He
could tell almost to a minute how far the dance had gone.

In another instant Mbonga's knife would sever one of the victim's
ears--that would mark the beginning of the end, for very shortly after
only a writhing mass of mutilated flesh would remain.

There would still be life in it, but death then would be the only
charity it craved.

The stake stood forty feet from the nearest tree.  Tarzan coiled his
rope.  Then there rose suddenly above the fiendish cries of the dancing
demons the awful challenge of the ape-man.

The dancers halted as though turned to stone.

The rope sped with singing whir high above the heads of the blacks.  It
was quite invisible in the flaring lights of the camp fires.

D'Arnot opened his eyes.  A huge black, standing directly before him,
lunged backward as though felled by an invisible hand.

Struggling and shrieking, his body, rolling from side to side, moved
quickly toward the shadows beneath the trees.

The blacks, their eyes protruding in horror, watched spellbound.

Once beneath the trees, the body rose straight into the air, and as it
disappeared into the foliage above, the terrified negroes, screaming
with fright, broke into a mad race for the village gate.

D'Arnot was left alone.

He was a brave man, but he had felt the short hairs bristle upon the
nape of his neck when that uncanny cry rose upon the air.

As the writhing body of the black soared, as though by unearthly power,
into the dense foliage of the forest, D'Arnot felt an icy shiver run
along his spine, as though death had risen from a dark grave and laid a
cold and clammy finger on his flesh.

As D'Arnot watched the spot where the body had entered the tree he
heard the sounds of movement there.

The branches swayed as though under the weight of a man's body--there
was a crash and the black came sprawling to earth again,--to lie very
quietly where he had fallen.

Immediately after him came a white body, but this one alighted erect.

D'Arnot saw a clean-limbed young giant emerge from the shadows into the
firelight and come quickly toward him.

What could it mean?  Who could it be?  Some new creature of torture and
destruction, doubtless.

D'Arnot waited.  His eyes never left the face of the advancing man.
Nor did the other's frank, clear eyes waver beneath D'Arnot's fixed
gaze.

D'Arnot was reassured, but still without much hope, though he felt that
that face could not mask a cruel heart.

Without a word Tarzan of the Apes cut the bonds which held the
Frenchman.  Weak from suffering and loss of blood, he would have fallen
but for the strong arm that caught him.

He felt himself lifted from the ground.  There was a sensation as of
flying, and then he lost consciousness.




Chapter XXII

The Search Party


When dawn broke upon the little camp of Frenchmen in the heart of the
jungle it found a sad and disheartened group.

As soon as it was light enough to see their surroundings Lieutenant
Charpentier sent men in groups of three in several directions to locate
the trail, and in ten minutes it was found and the expedition was
hurrying back toward the beach.

It was slow work, for they bore the bodies of six dead men, two more
having succumbed during the night, and several of those who were
wounded required support to move even very slowly.

Charpentier had decided to return to camp for reinforcements, and then
make an attempt to track down the natives and rescue D'Arnot.

It was late in the afternoon when the exhausted men reached the
clearing by the beach, but for two of them the return brought so great
a happiness that all their suffering and heartbreaking grief was
forgotten on the instant.

As the little party emerged from the jungle the first person that
Professor Porter and Cecil Clayton saw was Jane, standing by the cabin
door.

With a little cry of joy and relief she ran forward to greet them,
throwing her arms about her father's neck and bursting into tears for
the first time since they had been cast upon this hideous and
adventurous shore.

Professor Porter strove manfully to suppress his own emotions, but the
strain upon his nerves and weakened vitality were too much for him, and
at length, burying his old face in the girl's shoulder, he sobbed
quietly like a tired child.

Jane led him toward the cabin, and the Frenchmen turned toward the
beach from which several of their fellows were advancing to meet them.

Clayton, wishing to leave father and daughter alone, joined the sailors
and remained talking with the officers until their boat pulled away
toward the cruiser whither Lieutenant Charpentier was bound to report
the unhappy outcome of his adventure.

Then Clayton turned back slowly toward the cabin.  His heart was filled
with happiness.  The woman he loved was safe.

He wondered by what manner of miracle she had been spared.  To see her
alive seemed almost unbelievable.

As he approached the cabin he saw Jane coming out.  When she saw him
she hurried forward to meet him.

"Jane!" he cried, "God has been good to us, indeed.  Tell me how you
escaped--what form Providence took to save you for--us."

He had never before called her by her given name.  Forty-eight hours
before it would have suffused Jane with a soft glow of pleasure to have
heard that name from Clayton's lips--now it frightened her.

"Mr. Clayton," she said quietly, extending her hand, "first let me
thank you for your chivalrous loyalty to my dear father.  He has told
me how noble and self-sacrificing you have been.  How can we repay you!"

Clayton noticed that she did not return his familiar salutation, but he
felt no misgivings on that score.  She had been through so much.  This
was no time to force his love upon her, he quickly realized.

"I am already repaid," he said.  "Just to see you and Professor Porter
both safe, well, and together again.  I do not think that I could much
longer have endured the pathos of his quiet and uncomplaining grief.

"It was the saddest experience of my life, Miss Porter; and then, added
to it, there was my own grief--the greatest I have ever known.  But his
was so hopeless--his was pitiful.  It taught me that no love, not even
that of a man for his wife may be so deep and terrible and
self-sacrificing as the love of a father for his daughter."

The girl bowed her head.  There was a question she wanted to ask, but
it seemed almost sacrilegious in the face of the love of these two men
and the terrible suffering they had endured while she sat laughing and
happy beside a godlike creature of the forest, eating delicious fruits
and looking with eyes of love into answering eyes.

But love is a strange master, and human nature is still stranger, so
she asked her question.

"Where is the forest man who went to rescue you?  Why did he not
return?"

"I do not understand," said Clayton.  "Whom do you mean?"

"He who has saved each of us--who saved me from the gorilla."

"Oh," cried Clayton, in surprise.  "It was he who rescued you?  You
have not told me anything of your adventure, you know."

"But the wood man," she urged.  "Have you not seen him?  When we heard
the shots in the jungle, very faint and far away, he left me.  We had
just reached the clearing, and he hurried off in the direction of the
fighting.  I know he went to aid you."

Her tone was almost pleading--her manner tense with suppressed emotion.
Clayton could not but notice it, and he wondered, vaguely, why she was
so deeply moved--so anxious to know the whereabouts of this strange
creature.

Yet a feeling of apprehension of some impending sorrow haunted him, and
in his breast, unknown to himself, was implanted the first germ of
jealousy and suspicion of the ape-man, to whom he owed his life.

"We did not see him," he replied quietly.  "He did not join us."  And
then after a moment of thoughtful pause:  "Possibly he joined his own
tribe--the men who attacked us."  He did not know why he had said it,
for he did not believe it.

The girl looked at him wide eyed for a moment.

"No!" she exclaimed vehemently, much too vehemently he thought.  "It
could not be.  They were savages."

Clayton looked puzzled.

"He is a strange, half-savage creature of the jungle, Miss Porter.  We
know nothing of him.  He neither speaks nor understands any European
tongue--and his ornaments and weapons are those of the West Coast
savages."

Clayton was speaking rapidly.

"There are no other human beings than savages within hundreds of miles,
Miss Porter.  He must belong to the tribes which attacked us, or to
some other equally savage--he may even be a cannibal."

Jane blanched.

"I will not believe it," she half whispered.  "It is not true.  You
shall see," she said, addressing Clayton, "that he will come back and
that he will prove that you are wrong.  You do not know him as I do.  I
tell you that he is a gentleman."

Clayton was a generous and chivalrous man, but something in the girl's
breathless defense of the forest man stirred him to unreasoning
jealousy, so that for the instant he forgot all that they owed to this
wild demi-god, and he answered her with a half sneer upon his lip.

"Possibly you are right, Miss Porter," he said, "but I do not think
that any of us need worry about our carrion-eating acquaintance.  The
chances are that he is some half-demented castaway who will forget us
more quickly, but no more surely, than we shall forget him.  He is only
a beast of the jungle, Miss Porter."

The girl did not answer, but she felt her heart shrivel within her.

She knew that Clayton spoke merely what he thought, and for the first
time she began to analyze the structure which supported her newfound
love, and to subject its object to a critical examination.

Slowly she turned and walked back to the cabin.  She tried to imagine
her wood-god by her side in the saloon of an ocean liner.  She saw him
eating with his hands, tearing his food like a beast of prey, and
wiping his greasy fingers upon his thighs.  She shuddered.

She saw him as she introduced him to her friends--uncouth,
illiterate--a boor; and the girl winced.

She had reached her room now, and as she sat upon the edge of her bed
of ferns and grasses, with one hand resting upon her rising and falling
bosom, she felt the hard outlines of the man's locket.

She drew it out, holding it in the palm of her hand for a moment with
tear-blurred eyes bent upon it.  Then she raised it to her lips, and
crushing it there buried her face in the soft ferns, sobbing.

"Beast?" she murmured.  "Then God make me a beast; for, man or beast, I
am yours."

She did not see Clayton again that day.  Esmeralda brought her supper
to her, and she sent word to her father that she was suffering from the
reaction following her adventure.

The next morning Clayton left early with the relief expedition in
search of Lieutenant D'Arnot.  There were two hundred armed men this
time, with ten officers and two surgeons, and provisions for a week.

They carried bedding and hammocks, the latter for transporting their
sick and wounded.

It was a determined and angry company--a punitive expedition as well as
one of relief.  They reached the site of the skirmish of the previous
expedition shortly after noon, for they were now traveling a known
trail and no time was lost in exploring.

From there on the elephant-track led straight to Mbonga's village.  It
was but two o'clock when the head of the column halted upon the edge of
the clearing.

Lieutenant Charpentier, who was in command, immediately sent a portion
of his force through the jungle to the opposite side of the village.
Another detachment was dispatched to a point before the village gate,
while he remained with the balance upon the south side of the clearing.

It was arranged that the party which was to take its position to the
north, and which would be the last to gain its station should commence
the assault, and that their opening volley should be the signal for a
concerted rush from all sides in an attempt to carry the village by
storm at the first charge.

For half an hour the men with Lieutenant Charpentier crouched in the
dense foliage of the jungle, waiting the signal.  To them it seemed
like hours.  They could see natives in the fields, and others moving in
and out of the village gate.

At length the signal came--a sharp rattle of musketry, and like one
man, an answering volley tore from the jungle to the west and to the
south.

The natives in the field dropped their implements and broke madly for
the palisade.  The French bullets mowed them down, and the French
sailors bounded over their prostrate bodies straight for the village
gate.

So sudden and unexpected the assault had been that the whites reached
the gates before the frightened natives could bar them, and in another
minute the village street was filled with armed men fighting hand to
hand in an inextricable tangle.

For a few moments the blacks held their ground within the entrance to
the street, but the revolvers, rifles and cutlasses of the Frenchmen
crumpled the native spearmen and struck down the black archers with
their bows halfdrawn.

Soon the battle turned to a wild rout, and then to a grim massacre; for
the French sailors had seen bits of D'Arnot's uniform upon several of
the black warriors who opposed them.

They spared the children and those of the women whom they were not
forced to kill in self-defense, but when at length they stopped,
panting, blood covered and sweating, it was because there lived to
oppose them no single warrior of all the savage village of Mbonga.

Carefully they ransacked every hut and corner of the village, but no
sign of D'Arnot could they find.  They questioned the prisoners by
signs, and finally one of the sailors who had served in the French
Congo found that he could make them understand the bastard tongue that
passes for language between the whites and the more degraded tribes of
the coast, but even then they could learn nothing definite regarding
the fate of D'Arnot.

Only excited gestures and expressions of fear could they obtain in
response to their inquiries concerning their fellow; and at last they
became convinced that these were but evidences of the guilt of these
demons who had slaughtered and eaten their comrade two nights before.

At length all hope left them, and they prepared to camp for the night
within the village.  The prisoners were herded into three huts where
they were heavily guarded.  Sentries were posted at the barred gates,
and finally the village was wrapped in the silence of slumber, except
for the wailing of the native women for their dead.


The next morning they set out upon the return march.  Their original
intention had been to burn the village, but this idea was abandoned and
the prisoners were left behind, weeping and moaning, but with roofs to
cover them and a palisade for refuge from the beasts of the jungle.

Slowly the expedition retraced its steps of the preceding day.  Ten
loaded hammocks retarded its pace.  In eight of them lay the more
seriously wounded, while two swung beneath the weight of the dead.

Clayton and Lieutenant Charpentier brought up the rear of the column;
the Englishman silent in respect for the other's grief, for D'Arnot and
Charpentier had been inseparable friends since boyhood.

Clayton could not but realize that the Frenchman felt his grief the
more keenly because D'Arnot's sacrifice had been so futile, since Jane
had been rescued before D'Arnot had fallen into the hands of the
savages, and again because the service in which he had lost his life
had been outside his duty and for strangers and aliens; but when he
spoke of it to Lieutenant Charpentier, the latter shook his head.

"No, Monsieur," he said, "D'Arnot would have chosen to die thus.  I
only grieve that I could not have died for him, or at least with him.
I wish that you could have known him better, Monsieur.  He was indeed
an officer and a gentleman--a title conferred on many, but deserved by
so few.

"He did not die futilely, for his death in the cause of a strange
American girl will make us, his comrades, face our ends the more
bravely, however they may come to us."

Clayton did not reply, but within him rose a new respect for Frenchmen
which remained undimmed ever after.

It was quite late when they reached the cabin by the beach.  A single
shot before they emerged from the jungle had announced to those in camp
as well as on the ship that the expedition had been too late--for it
had been prearranged that when they came within a mile or two of camp
one shot was to be fired to denote failure, or three for success, while
two would have indicated that they had found no sign of either D'Arnot
or his black captors.

So it was a solemn party that awaited their coming, and few words were
spoken as the dead and wounded men were tenderly placed in boats and
rowed silently toward the cruiser.

Clayton, exhausted from his five days of laborious marching through the
jungle and from the effects of his two battles with the blacks, turned
toward the cabin to seek a mouthful of food and then the comparative
ease of his bed of grasses after two nights in the jungle.

By the cabin door stood Jane.

"The poor lieutenant?" she asked.  "Did you find no trace of him?"

"We were too late, Miss Porter," he replied sadly.

"Tell me.  What had happened?" she asked.

"I cannot, Miss Porter, it is too horrible."

"You do not mean that they had tortured him?" she whispered.

"We do not know what they did to him BEFORE they killed him," he
answered, his face drawn with fatigue and the sorrow he felt for poor
D'Arnot and he emphasized the word before.

"BEFORE they killed him!  What do you mean?  They are not--?  They are
not--?"

She was thinking of what Clayton had said of the forest man's probable
relationship to this tribe and she could not frame the awful word.

"Yes, Miss Porter, they were--cannibals," he said, almost bitterly, for
to him too had suddenly come the thought of the forest man, and the
strange, unaccountable jealousy he had felt two days before swept over
him once more.

And then in sudden brutality that was as unlike Clayton as courteous
consideration is unlike an ape, he blurted out:

"When your forest god left you he was doubtless hurrying to the feast."

He was sorry ere the words were spoken though he did not know how
cruelly they had cut the girl.  His regret was for his baseless
disloyalty to one who had saved the lives of every member of his party,
and offered harm to none.

The girl's head went high.

"There could be but one suitable reply to your assertion, Mr. Clayton,"
she said icily, "and I regret that I am not a man, that I might make
it."  She turned quickly and entered the cabin.

Clayton was an Englishman, so the girl had passed quite out of sight
before he deduced what reply a man would have made.

"Upon my word," he said ruefully, "she called me a liar.  And I fancy I
jolly well deserved it," he added thoughtfully.  "Clayton, my boy, I
know you are tired out and unstrung, but that's no reason why you
should make an ass of yourself.  You'd better go to bed."

But before he did so he called gently to Jane upon the opposite side of
the sailcloth partition, for he wished to apologize, but he might as
well have addressed the Sphinx.  Then he wrote upon a piece of paper
and shoved it beneath the partition.

Jane saw the little note and ignored it, for she was very angry and
hurt and mortified, but--she was a woman, and so eventually she picked
it up and read it.

MY DEAR MISS PORTER:

I had no reason to insinuate what I did.  My only excuse is that my
nerves must be unstrung--which is no excuse at all.

Please try and think that I did not say it.  I am very sorry.  I would
not have hurt YOU, above all others in the world.  Say that you forgive
me.

              WM. CECIL CLAYTON.


"He did think it or he never would have said it," reasoned the girl,
"but it cannot be true--oh, I know it is not true!"

One sentence in the letter frightened her:  "I would not have hurt YOU
above all others in the world."

A week ago that sentence would have filled her with delight, now it
depressed her.

She wished she had never met Clayton.  She was sorry that she had ever
seen the forest god.  No, she was glad.  And there was that other note
she had found in the grass before the cabin the day after her return
from the jungle, the love note signed by Tarzan of the Apes.

Who could be this new suitor?  If he were another of the wild denizens
of this terrible forest what might he not do to claim her?

"Esmeralda!  Wake up," she cried.

"You make me so irritable, sleeping there peacefully when you know
perfectly well that the world is filled with sorrow."

"Gaberelle!" screamed Esmeralda, sitting up.  "What is it now?  A
hipponocerous?  Where is he, Miss Jane?"

"Nonsense, Esmeralda, there is nothing.  Go back to sleep.  You are bad
enough asleep, but you are infinitely worse awake."

"Yes honey, but what's the matter with you, precious?  You acts sort of
disgranulated this evening."

"Oh, Esmeralda, I'm just plain ugly to-night," said the girl.  "Don't
pay any attention to me--that's a dear."

"Yes, honey; now you go right to sleep.  Your nerves are all on edge.
What with all these ripotamuses and man eating geniuses that Mister
Philander been telling about--Lord, it ain't no wonder we all get
nervous prosecution."

Jane crossed the little room, laughing, and kissing the faithful woman,
bid Esmeralda good night.




Chapter XXIII

Brother Men.


When D'Arnot regained consciousness, he found himself lying upon a bed
of soft ferns and grasses beneath a little "A" shaped shelter of boughs.

At his feet an opening looked out upon a green sward, and at a little
distance beyond was the dense wall of jungle and forest.

He was very lame and sore and weak, and as full consciousness returned
he felt the sharp torture of many cruel wounds and the dull aching of
every bone and muscle in his body as a result of the hideous beating he
had received.

Even the turning of his head caused him such excruciating agony that he
lay still with closed eyes for a long time.

He tried to piece out the details of his adventure prior to the time he
lost consciousness to see if they would explain his present
whereabouts--he wondered if he were among friends or foes.

At length he recollected the whole hideous scene at the stake, and
finally recalled the strange white figure in whose arms he had sunk
into oblivion.

D'Arnot wondered what fate lay in store for him now.  He could neither
see nor hear any signs of life about him.

The incessant hum of the jungle--the rustling of millions of
leaves--the buzz of insects--the voices of the birds and monkeys seemed
blended into a strangely soothing purr, as though he lay apart, far
from the myriad life whose sounds came to him only as a blurred echo.

At length he fell into a quiet slumber, nor did he awake again until
afternoon.

Once more he experienced the strange sense of utter bewilderment that
had marked his earlier awakening, but soon he recalled the recent past,
and looking through the opening at his feet he saw the figure of a man
squatting on his haunches.

The broad, muscular back was turned toward him, but, tanned though it
was, D'Arnot saw that it was the back of a white man, and he thanked
God.

The Frenchman called faintly.  The man turned, and rising, came toward
the shelter.  His face was very handsome--the handsomest, thought
D'Arnot, that he had ever seen.

Stooping, he crawled into the shelter beside the wounded officer, and
placed a cool hand upon his forehead.

D'Arnot spoke to him in French, but the man only shook his head--sadly,
it seemed to the Frenchman.

Then D'Arnot tried English, but still the man shook his head.  Italian,
Spanish and German brought similar discouragement.

D'Arnot knew a few words of Norwegian, Russian, Greek, and also had a
smattering of the language of one of the West Coast negro tribes--the
man denied them all.

After examining D'Arnot's wounds the man left the shelter and
disappeared.  In half an hour he was back with fruit and a hollow
gourd-like vegetable filled with water.

D'Arnot drank and ate a little.  He was surprised that he had no fever.
Again he tried to converse with his strange nurse, but the attempt was
useless.

Suddenly the man hastened from the shelter only to return a few minutes
later with several pieces of bark and--wonder of wonders--a lead pencil.

Squatting beside D'Arnot he wrote for a minute on the smooth inner
surface of the bark; then he handed it to the Frenchman.

D'Arnot was astonished to see, in plain print-like characters, a
message in English:


I am Tarzan of the Apes.  Who are you?  Can you read this language?


D'Arnot seized the pencil--then he stopped.  This strange man wrote
English--evidently he was an Englishman.

"Yes," said D'Arnot, "I read English.  I speak it also.  Now we may
talk.  First let me thank you for all that you have done for me."

The man only shook his head and pointed to the pencil and the bark.

"MON DIEU!" cried D'Arnot.  "If you are English why is it then that you
cannot speak English?"

And then in a flash it came to him--the man was a mute, possibly a deaf
mute.

So D'Arnot wrote a message on the bark, in English.


I am Paul d'Arnot, Lieutenant in the navy of France.  I thank you for
what you have done for me.  You have saved my life, and all that I have
is yours.  May I ask how it is that one who writes English does not
speak it?


Tarzan's reply filled D'Arnot with still greater wonder:


I speak only the language of my tribe--the great apes who were
Kerchak's; and a little of the languages of Tantor, the elephant, and
Numa, the lion, and of the other folks of the jungle I understand.
With a human being I have never spoken, except once with Jane Porter,
by signs.  This is the first time I have spoken with another of my kind
through written words.


D'Arnot was mystified.  It seemed incredible that there lived upon
earth a full-grown man who had never spoken with a fellow man, and
still more preposterous that such a one could read and write.

He looked again at Tarzan's message--"except once, with Jane Porter."
That was the American girl who had been carried into the jungle by a
gorilla.

A sudden light commenced to dawn on D'Arnot--this then was the
"gorilla."  He seized the pencil and wrote:


Where is Jane Porter?


And Tarzan replied, below:


Back with her people in the cabin of Tarzan of the Apes.


She is not dead then?  Where was she?  What happened to her?


She is not dead.  She was taken by Terkoz to be his wife; but Tarzan of
the Apes took her away from Terkoz and killed him before he could harm
her.

None in all the jungle may face Tarzan of the Apes in battle, and live.
I am Tarzan of the Apes--mighty fighter.

D'Arnot wrote:


I am glad she is safe.  It pains me to write, I will rest a while.


And then Tarzan:


Yes, rest.  When you are well I shall take you back to your people.


For many days D'Arnot lay upon his bed of soft ferns.  The second day a
fever had come and D'Arnot thought that it meant infection and he knew
that he would die.

An idea came to him.  He wondered why he had not thought of it before.

He called Tarzan and indicated by signs that he would write, and when
Tarzan had fetched the bark and pencil, D'Arnot wrote:


Can you go to my people and lead them here?  I will write a message
that you may take to them, and they will follow you.


Tarzan shook his head and taking the bark, wrote:


I had thought of that--the first day; but I dared not.  The great apes
come often to this spot, and if they found you here, wounded and alone,
they would kill you.


D'Arnot turned on his side and closed his eyes.  He did not wish to
die; but he felt that he was going, for the fever was mounting higher
and higher.  That night he lost consciousness.

For three days he was in delirium, and Tarzan sat beside him and bathed
his head and hands and washed his wounds.

On the fourth day the fever broke as suddenly as it had come, but it
left D'Arnot a shadow of his former self, and very weak.  Tarzan had to
lift him that he might drink from the gourd.

The fever had not been the result of infection, as D'Arnot had thought,
but one of those that commonly attack whites in the jungles of Africa,
and either kill or leave them as suddenly as D'Arnot's had left him.

Two days later, D'Arnot was tottering about the amphitheater, Tarzan's
strong arm about him to keep him from falling.

They sat beneath the shade of a great tree, and Tarzan found some
smooth bark that they might converse.

D'Arnot wrote the first message:


What can I do to repay you for all that you have done for me?


And Tarzan, in reply:


Teach me to speak the language of men.


And so D'Arnot commenced at once, pointing out familiar objects and
repeating their names in French, for he thought that it would be easier
to teach this man his own language, since he understood it himself best
of all.

It meant nothing to Tarzan, of course, for he could not tell one
language from another, so when he pointed to the word man which he had
printed upon a piece of bark he learned from D'Arnot that it was
pronounced HOMME, and in the same way he was taught to pronounce ape,
SINGE and tree, ARBRE.

He was a most eager student, and in two more days had mastered so much
French that he could speak little sentences such as:  "That is a tree,"
"this is grass," "I am hungry," and the like, but D'Arnot found that it
was difficult to teach him the French construction upon a foundation of
English.

The Frenchman wrote little lessons for him in English and had Tarzan
repeat them in French, but as a literal translation was usually very
poor French Tarzan was often confused.

D'Arnot realized now that he had made a mistake, but it seemed too late
to go back and do it all over again and force Tarzan to unlearn all
that he had learned, especially as they were rapidly approaching a
point where they would be able to converse.

On the third day after the fever broke Tarzan wrote a message asking
D'Arnot if he felt strong enough to be carried back to the cabin.
Tarzan was as anxious to go as D'Arnot, for he longed to see Jane again.

It had been hard for him to remain with the Frenchman all these days
for that very reason, and that he had unselfishly done so spoke more
glowingly of his nobility of character than even did his rescuing the
French officer from Mbonga's clutches.

D'Arnot, only too willing to attempt the journey, wrote:


But you cannot carry me all the distance through this tangled forest.


Tarzan laughed.

"MAIS OUI," he said, and D'Arnot laughed aloud to hear the phrase that
he used so often glide from Tarzan's tongue.

So they set out, D'Arnot marveling as had Clayton and Jane at the
wondrous strength and agility of the apeman.

Mid-afternoon brought them to the clearing, and as Tarzan dropped to
earth from the branches of the last tree his heart leaped and bounded
against his ribs in anticipation of seeing Jane so soon again.

No one was in sight outside the cabin, and D'Arnot was perplexed to
note that neither the cruiser nor the Arrow was at anchor in the bay.

An atmosphere of loneliness pervaded the spot, which caught suddenly at
both men as they strode toward the cabin.

Neither spoke, yet both knew before they opened the closed door what
they would find beyond.

Tarzan lifted the latch and pushed the great door in upon its wooden
hinges.  It was as they had feared.  The cabin was deserted.

The men turned and looked at one another.  D'Arnot knew that his people
thought him dead; but Tarzan thought only of the woman who had kissed
him in love and now had fled from him while he was serving one of her
people.

A great bitterness rose in his heart.  He would go away, far into the
jungle and join his tribe.  Never would he see one of his own kind
again, nor could he bear the thought of returning to the cabin.  He
would leave that forever behind him with the great hopes he had nursed
there of finding his own race and becoming a man among men.

And the Frenchman?  D'Arnot?  What of him?  He could get along as
Tarzan had.  Tarzan did not want to see him more.  He wanted to get
away from everything that might remind him of Jane.

As Tarzan stood upon the threshold brooding, D'Arnot had entered the
cabin.  Many comforts he saw that had been left behind.  He recognized
numerous articles from the cruiser--a camp oven, some kitchen utensils,
a rifle and many rounds of ammunition, canned foods, blankets, two
chairs and a cot--and several books and periodicals, mostly American.

"They must intend returning," thought D'Arnot.

He walked over to the table that John Clayton had built so many years
before to serve as a desk, and on it he saw two notes addressed to
Tarzan of the Apes.

One was in a strong masculine hand and was unsealed.  The other, in a
woman's hand, was sealed.

"Here are two messages for you, Tarzan of the Apes," cried D'Arnot,
turning toward the door; but his companion was not there.

D'Arnot walked to the door and looked out.  Tarzan was nowhere in
sight.  He called aloud but there was no response.

"MON DIEU!" exclaimed D'Arnot, "he has left me.  I feel it.  He has
gone back into his jungle and left me here alone."

And then he remembered the look on Tarzan's face when they had
discovered that the cabin was empty--such a look as the hunter sees in
the eyes of the wounded deer he has wantonly brought down.

The man had been hard hit--D'Arnot realized it now--but why?  He could
not understand.

The Frenchman looked about him.  The loneliness and the horror of the
place commenced to get on his nerves--already weakened by the ordeal of
suffering and sickness he had passed through.

To be left here alone beside this awful jungle--never to hear a human
voice or see a human face--in constant dread of savage beasts and more
terribly savage men--a prey to solitude and hopelessness.  It was awful.

And far to the east Tarzan of the Apes was speeding through the middle
terrace back to his tribe.  Never had he traveled with such reckless
speed.  He felt that he was running away from himself--that by hurtling
through the forest like a frightened squirrel he was escaping from his
own thoughts.  But no matter how fast he went he found them always with
him.

He passed above the sinuous body of Sabor, the lioness, going in the
opposite direction--toward the cabin, thought Tarzan.

What could D'Arnot do against Sabor--or if Bolgani, the gorilla, should
come upon him--or Numa, the lion, or cruel Sheeta?

Tarzan paused in his flight.

"What are you, Tarzan?" he asked aloud.  "An ape or a man?"

"If you are an ape you will do as the apes would do--leave one of your
kind to die in the jungle if it suited your whim to go elsewhere.

"If you are a man, you will return to protect your kind.  You will not
run away from one of your own people, because one of them has run away
from you."


D'Arnot closed the cabin door.  He was very nervous.  Even brave men,
and D'Arnot was a brave man, are sometimes frightened by solitude.

He loaded one of the rifles and placed it within easy reach.  Then he
went to the desk and took up the unsealed letter addressed to Tarzan.

Possibly it contained word that his people had but left the beach
temporarily.  He felt that it would be no breach of ethics to read this
letter, so he took the enclosure from the envelope and read:

TO TARZAN OF THE APES:


We thank you for the use of your cabin, and are sorry that you did not
permit us the pleasure of seeing and thanking you in person.

We have harmed nothing, but have left many things for you which may add
to your comfort and safety here in your lonely home.

If you know the strange white man who saved our lives so many times,
and brought us food, and if you can converse with him, thank him, also,
for his kindness.

We sail within the hour, never to return; but we wish you and that
other jungle friend to know that we shall always thank you for what you
did for strangers on your shore, and that we should have done
infinitely more to reward you both had you given us the opportunity.

              Very respectfully,
              WM. CECIL CLAYTON.


"'Never to return,'" muttered D'Arnot, and threw himself face downward
upon the cot.

An hour later he started up listening.  Something was at the door
trying to enter.

D'Arnot reached for the loaded rifle and placed it to his shoulder.

Dusk was falling, and the interior of the cabin was very dark; but the
man could see the latch moving from its place.

He felt his hair rising upon his scalp.

Gently the door opened until a thin crack showed something standing
just beyond.

D'Arnot sighted along the blue barrel at the crack of the door--and
then he pulled the trigger.




Chapter XXIV

Lost Treasure


When the expedition returned, following their fruitless endeavor to
succor D'Arnot, Captain Dufranne was anxious to steam away as quickly
as possible, and all save Jane had acquiesced.

"No," she said, determinedly, "I shall not go, nor should you, for
there are two friends in that jungle who will come out of it some day
expecting to find us awaiting them.

"Your officer, Captain Dufranne, is one of them, and the forest man who
has saved the lives of every member of my father's party is the other.

"He left me at the edge of the jungle two days ago to hasten to the aid
of my father and Mr. Clayton, as he thought, and he has stayed to
rescue Lieutenant D'Arnot; of that you may be sure.

"Had he been too late to be of service to the lieutenant he would have
been back before now--the fact that he is not back is sufficient proof
to me that he is delayed because Lieutenant D'Arnot is wounded, or he
has had to follow his captors further than the village which your
sailors attacked."

"But poor D'Arnot's uniform and all his belongings were found in that
village, Miss Porter," argued the captain, "and the natives showed
great excitement when questioned as to the white man's fate."

"Yes, Captain, but they did not admit that he was dead and as for his
clothes and accouterments being in their possession--why more civilized
peoples than these poor savage negroes strip their prisoners of every
article of value whether they intend killing them or not.

"Even the soldiers of my own dear South looted not only the living but
the dead.  It is strong circumstantial evidence, I will admit, but it
is not positive proof."

"Possibly your forest man, himself was captured or killed by the
savages," suggested Captain Dufranne.

The girl laughed.

"You do not know him," she replied, a little thrill of pride setting
her nerves a-tingle at the thought that she spoke of her own.

"I admit that he would be worth waiting for, this superman of yours,"
laughed the captain.  "I most certainly should like to see him."

"Then wait for him, my dear captain," urged the girl, "for I intend
doing so."

The Frenchman would have been a very much surprised man could he have
interpreted the true meaning of the girl's words.

They had been walking from the beach toward the cabin as they talked,
and now they joined a little group sitting on camp stools in the shade
of a great tree beside the cabin.

Professor Porter was there, and Mr. Philander and Clayton, with
Lieutenant Charpentier and two of his brother officers, while Esmeralda
hovered in the background, ever and anon venturing opinions and
comments with the freedom of an old and much-indulged family servant.

The officers arose and saluted as their superior approached, and
Clayton surrendered his camp stool to Jane.

"We were just discussing poor Paul's fate," said Captain Dufranne.
"Miss Porter insists that we have no absolute proof of his death--nor
have we.  And on the other hand she maintains that the continued
absence of your omnipotent jungle friend indicates that D'Arnot is
still in need of his services, either because he is wounded, or still
is a prisoner in a more distant native village."

"It has been suggested," ventured Lieutenant Charpentier, "that the
wild man may have been a member of the tribe of blacks who attacked our
party--that he was hastening to aid THEM--his own people."

Jane shot a quick glance at Clayton.

"It seems vastly more reasonable," said Professor Porter.

"I do not agree with you," objected Mr. Philander.  "He had ample
opportunity to harm us himself, or to lead his people against us.
Instead, during our long residence here, he has been uniformly
consistent in his role of protector and provider."

"That is true," interjected Clayton, "yet we must not overlook the fact
that except for himself the only human beings within hundreds of miles
are savage cannibals.  He was armed precisely as are they, which
indicates that he has maintained relations of some nature with them,
and the fact that he is but one against possibly thousands suggests
that these relations could scarcely have been other than friendly."

"It seems improbable then that he is not connected with them," remarked
the captain; "possibly a member of this tribe."

"Otherwise," added another of the officers, "how could he have lived a
sufficient length of time among the savage denizens of the jungle,
brute and human, to have become proficient in woodcraft, or in the use
of African weapons."

"You are judging him according to your own standards, gentlemen," said
Jane.  "An ordinary white man such as any of you--pardon me, I did not
mean just that--rather, a white man above the ordinary in physique and
intelligence could never, I grant you, have lived a year alone and
naked in this tropical jungle; but this man not only surpasses the
average white man in strength and agility, but as far transcends our
trained athletes and 'strong men' as they surpass a day-old babe; and
his courage and ferocity in battle are those of the wild beast."

"He has certainly won a loyal champion, Miss Porter," said Captain
Dufranne, laughing.  "I am sure that there be none of us here but would
willingly face death a hundred times in its most terrifying forms to
deserve the tributes of one even half so loyal--or so beautiful."

"You would not wonder that I defend him," said the girl, "could you
have seen him as I saw him, battling in my behalf with that huge hairy
brute.

"Could you have seen him charge the monster as a bull might charge a
grizzly--absolutely without sign of fear or hesitation--you would have
believed him more than human.

"Could you have seen those mighty muscles knotting under the brown
skin--could you have seen them force back those awful fangs--you too
would have thought him invincible.

"And could you have seen the chivalrous treatment which he accorded a
strange girl of a strange race, you would feel the same absolute
confidence in him that I feel."

"You have won your suit, my fair pleader," cried the captain.  "This
court finds the defendant not guilty, and the cruiser shall wait a few
days longer that he may have an opportunity to come and thank the
divine Portia."

"For the Lord's sake honey," cried Esmeralda.  "You all don't mean to
tell ME that you're going to stay right here in this here land of
carnivable animals when you all got the opportunity to escapade on that
boat?  Don't you tell me THAT, honey."

"Why, Esmeralda!  You should be ashamed of yourself," cried Jane.  "Is
this any way to show your gratitude to the man who saved your life
twice?"

"Well, Miss Jane, that's all jest as you say; but that there forest man
never did save us to stay here.  He done save us so we all could get
AWAY from here.  I expect he be mighty peevish when he find we ain't
got no more sense than to stay right here after he done give us the
chance to get away.

"I hoped I'd never have to sleep in this here geological garden another
night and listen to all them lonesome noises that come out of that
jumble after dark."

"I don't blame you a bit, Esmeralda," said Clayton, "and you certainly
did hit it off right when you called them 'lonesome' noises.  I never
have been able to find the right word for them but that's it, don't you
know, lonesome noises."

"You and Esmeralda had better go and live on the cruiser," said Jane,
in fine scorn.  "What would you think if you HAD to live all of your
life in that jungle as our forest man has done?"

"I'm afraid I'd be a blooming bounder as a wild man," laughed Clayton,
ruefully.  "Those noises at night make the hair on my head bristle.  I
suppose that I should be ashamed to admit it, but it's the truth."

"I don't know about that," said Lieutenant Charpentier.  "I never
thought much about fear and that sort of thing--never tried to
determine whether I was a coward or brave man; but the other night as
we lay in the jungle there after poor D'Arnot was taken, and those
jungle noises rose and fell around us I began to think that I was a
coward indeed.  It was not the roaring and growling of the big beasts
that affected me so much as it was the stealthy noises--the ones that
you heard suddenly close by and then listened vainly for a repetition
of--the unaccountable sounds as of a great body moving almost
noiselessly, and the knowledge that you didn't KNOW how close it was,
or whether it were creeping closer after you ceased to hear it?  It was
those noises--and the eyes.

"MON DIEU!  I shall see them in the dark forever--the eyes that you
see, and those that you don't see, but feel--ah, they are the worst."

All were silent for a moment, and then Jane spoke.

"And he is out there," she said, in an awe-hushed whisper.  "Those eyes
will be glaring at him to-night, and at your comrade Lieutenant
D'Arnot.  Can you leave them, gentlemen, without at least rendering
them the passive succor which remaining here a few days longer might
insure them?"

"Tut, tut, child," said Professor Porter.  "Captain Dufranne is willing
to remain, and for my part I am perfectly willing, perfectly
willing--as I always have been to humor your childish whims."

"We can utilize the morrow in recovering the chest, Professor,"
suggested Mr. Philander.

"Quite so, quite so, Mr. Philander, I had almost forgotten the
treasure," exclaimed Professor Porter.  "Possibly we can borrow some
men from Captain Dufranne to assist us, and one of the prisoners to
point out the location of the chest."

"Most assuredly, my dear Professor, we are all yours to command," said
the captain.

And so it was arranged that on the next day Lieutenant Charpentier was
to take a detail of ten men, and one of the mutineers of the Arrow as a
guide, and unearth the treasure; and that the cruiser would remain for
a full week in the little harbor.  At the end of that time it was to be
assumed that D'Arnot was truly dead, and that the forest man would not
return while they remained.  Then the two vessels were to leave with
all the party.

Professor Porter did not accompany the treasure-seekers on the
following day, but when he saw them returning empty-handed toward noon,
he hastened forward to meet them--his usual preoccupied indifference
entirely vanished, and in its place a nervous and excited manner.

"Where is the treasure?" he cried to Clayton, while yet a hundred feet
separated them.

Clayton shook his head.

"Gone," he said, as he neared the professor.

"Gone!  It cannot be.  Who could have taken it?" cried Professor Porter.

"God only knows, Professor," replied Clayton.  "We might have thought
the fellow who guided us was lying about the location, but his surprise
and consternation on finding no chest beneath the body of the murdered
Snipes were too real to be feigned.  And then our spades showed us that
SOMETHING had been buried beneath the corpse, for a hole had been there
and it had been filled with loose earth."

"But who could have taken it?" repeated Professor Porter.

"Suspicion might naturally fall on the men of the cruiser," said
Lieutenant Charpentier, "but for the fact that sub-lieutenant Janviers
here assures me that no men have had shore leave--that none has been on
shore since we anchored here except under command of an officer.  I do
not know that you would suspect our men, but I am glad that there is
now no chance for suspicion to fall on them," he concluded.

"It would never have occurred to me to suspect the men to whom we owe
so much," replied Professor Porter, graciously.  "I would as soon
suspect my dear Clayton here, or Mr. Philander."

The Frenchmen smiled, both officers and sailors.  It was plain to see
that a burden had been lifted from their minds.

"The treasure has been gone for some time," continued Clayton.  "In
fact the body fell apart as we lifted it, which indicates that whoever
removed the treasure did so while the corpse was still fresh, for it
was intact when we first uncovered it."

"There must have been several in the party," said Jane, who had joined
them.  "You remember that it took four men to carry it."

"By jove!" cried Clayton.  "That's right.  It must have been done by a
party of blacks.  Probably one of them saw the men bury the chest and
then returned immediately after with a party of his friends, and
carried it off."

"Speculation is futile," said Professor Porter sadly.  "The chest is
gone.  We shall never see it again, nor the treasure that was in it."

Only Jane knew what the loss meant to her father, and none there knew
what it meant to her.

Six days later Captain Dufranne announced that they would sail early on
the morrow.

Jane would have begged for a further reprieve, had it not been that she
too had begun to believe that her forest lover would return no more.

In spite of herself she began to entertain doubts and fears.  The
reasonableness of the arguments of these disinterested French officers
commenced to convince her against her will.

That he was a cannibal she would not believe, but that he was an
adopted member of some savage tribe at length seemed possible to her.

She would not admit that he could be dead.  It was impossible to
believe that that perfect body, so filled with triumphant life, could
ever cease to harbor the vital spark--as soon believe that immortality
were dust.

As Jane permitted herself to harbor these thoughts, others equally
unwelcome forced themselves upon her.

If he belonged to some savage tribe he had a savage wife--a dozen of
them perhaps--and wild, half-caste children.  The girl shuddered, and
when they told her that the cruiser would sail on the morrow she was
almost glad.

It was she, though, who suggested that arms, ammunition, supplies and
comforts be left behind in the cabin, ostensibly for that intangible
personality who had signed himself Tarzan of the Apes, and for D'Arnot
should he still be living, but really, she hoped, for her forest
god--even though his feet should prove of clay.

And at the last minute she left a message for him, to be transmitted by
Tarzan of the Apes.

She was the last to leave the cabin, returning on some trivial pretext
after the others had started for the boat.

She kneeled down beside the bed in which she had spent so many nights,
and offered up a prayer for the safety of her primeval man, and
crushing his locket to her lips she murmured:

"I love you, and because I love you I believe in you.  But if I did not
believe, still should I love.  Had you come back for me, and had there
been no other way, I would have gone into the jungle with you--forever."




Chapter XXV

The Outpost of the World


With the report of his gun D'Arnot saw the door fly open and the figure
of a man pitch headlong within onto the cabin floor.

The Frenchman in his panic raised his gun to fire again into the
prostrate form, but suddenly in the half dusk of the open door he saw
that the man was white and in another instant realized that he had shot
his friend and protector, Tarzan of the Apes.

With a cry of anguish D'Arnot sprang to the ape-man's side, and
kneeling, lifted the latter's head in his arms--calling Tarzan's name
aloud.

There was no response, and then D'Arnot placed his ear above the man's
heart.  To his joy he heard its steady beating beneath.

Carefully he lifted Tarzan to the cot, and then, after closing and
bolting the door, he lighted one of the lamps and examined the wound.

The bullet had struck a glancing blow upon the skull.  There was an
ugly flesh wound, but no signs of a fracture of the skull.

D'Arnot breathed a sigh of relief, and went about bathing the blood
from Tarzan's face.

Soon the cool water revived him, and presently he opened his eyes to
look in questioning surprise at D'Arnot.

The latter had bound the wound with pieces of cloth, and as he saw that
Tarzan had regained consciousness he arose and going to the table wrote
a message, which he handed to the ape-man, explaining the terrible
mistake he had made and how thankful he was that the wound was not more
serious.

Tarzan, after reading the message, sat on the edge of the couch and
laughed.


"It is nothing," he said in French, and then, his vocabulary failing
him, he wrote:

You should have seen what Bolgani did to me, and Kerchak, and Terkoz,
before I killed them--then you would laugh at such a little scratch.


D'Arnot handed Tarzan the two messages that had been left for him.

Tarzan read the first one through with a look of sorrow on his face.
The second one he turned over and over, searching for an opening--he
had never seen a sealed envelope before.  At length he handed it to
D'Arnot.

The Frenchman had been watching him, and knew that Tarzan was puzzled
over the envelope.  How strange it seemed that to a full-grown white
man an envelope was a mystery.  D'Arnot opened it and handed the letter
back to Tarzan.

Sitting on a camp stool the ape-man spread the written sheet before him
and read:

TO TARZAN OF THE APES:

Before I leave let me add my thanks to those of Mr. Clayton for the
kindness you have shown in permitting us the use of your cabin.

That you never came to make friends with us has been a great regret to
us.  We should have liked so much to have seen and thanked our host.

There is another I should like to thank also, but he did not come back,
though I cannot believe that he is dead.

I do not know his name.  He is the great white giant who wore the
diamond locket upon his breast.

If you know him and can speak his language carry my thanks to him, and
tell him that I waited seven days for him to return.

Tell him, also, that in my home in America, in the city of Baltimore,
there will always be a welcome for him if he cares to come.

I found a note you wrote me lying among the leaves beneath a tree near
the cabin.  I do not know how you learned to love me, who have never
spoken to me, and I am very sorry if it is true, for I have already
given my heart to another.

But know that I am always your friend,
                                  JANE PORTER.


Tarzan sat with gaze fixed upon the floor for nearly an hour.  It was
evident to him from the notes that they did not know that he and Tarzan
of the Apes were one and the same.

"I have given my heart to another," he repeated over and over again to
himself.

Then she did not love him!  How could she have pretended love, and
raised him to such a pinnacle of hope only to cast him down to such
utter depths of despair!

Maybe her kisses were only signs of friendship.  How did he know, who
knew nothing of the customs of human beings?

Suddenly he arose, and, bidding D'Arnot good night as he had learned to
do, threw himself upon the couch of ferns that had been Jane Porter's.

D'Arnot extinguished the lamp, and lay down upon the cot.

For a week they did little but rest, D'Arnot coaching Tarzan in French.
At the end of that time the two men could converse quite easily.

One night, as they were sitting within the cabin before retiring,
Tarzan turned to D'Arnot.

"Where is America?" he said.

D'Arnot pointed toward the northwest.

"Many thousands of miles across the ocean," he replied.  "Why?"

"I am going there."

D'Arnot shook his head.

"It is impossible, my friend," he said.

Tarzan rose, and, going to one of the cupboards, returned with a
well-thumbed geography.

Turning to a map of the world, he said:

"I have never quite understood all this; explain it to me, please."

When D'Arnot had done so, showing him that the blue represented all the
water on the earth, and the bits of other colors the continents and
islands, Tarzan asked him to point out the spot where they now were.

D'Arnot did so.

"Now point out America," said Tarzan.

And as D'Arnot placed his finger upon North America, Tarzan smiled and
laid his palm upon the page, spanning the great ocean that lay between
the two continents.

"You see it is not so very far," he said; "scarce the width of my hand."

D'Arnot laughed.  How could he make the man understand?

Then he took a pencil and made a tiny point upon the shore of Africa.

"This little mark," he said, "is many times larger upon this map than
your cabin is upon the earth.  Do you see now how very far it is?"

Tarzan thought for a long time.

"Do any white men live in Africa?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Where are the nearest?"

D'Arnot pointed out a spot on the shore just north of them.

"So close?" asked Tarzan, in surprise.

"Yes," said D'Arnot; "but it is not close."

"Have they big boats to cross the ocean?"

"Yes."

"We shall go there to-morrow," announced Tarzan.

Again D'Arnot smiled and shook his head.

"It is too far.  We should die long before we reached them."

"Do you wish to stay here then forever?" asked Tarzan.

"No," said D'Arnot.

"Then we shall start to-morrow.  I do not like it here longer.  I
should rather die than remain here."

"Well," answered D'Arnot, with a shrug, "I do not know, my friend, but
that I also would rather die than remain here.  If you go, I shall go
with you."

"It is settled then," said Tarzan.  "I shall start for America
to-morrow."

"How will you get to America without money?" asked D'Arnot.

"What is money?" inquired Tarzan.

It took a long time to make him understand even imperfectly.

"How do men get money?" he asked at last.

"They work for it."

"Very well.  I will work for it, then."

"No, my friend," returned D'Arnot, "you need not worry about money, nor
need you work for it.  I have enough money for two--enough for twenty.
Much more than is good for one man and you shall have all you need if
ever we reach civilization."

So on the following day they started north along the shore.  Each man
carrying a rifle and ammunition, beside bedding and some food and
cooking utensils.

The latter seemed to Tarzan a most useless encumbrance, so he threw his
away.

"But you must learn to eat cooked food, my friend," remonstrated
D'Arnot.  "No civilized men eat raw flesh."

"There will be time enough when I reach civilization," said Tarzan.  "I
do not like the things and they only spoil the taste of good meat."

For a month they traveled north.  Sometimes finding food in plenty and
again going hungry for days.

They saw no signs of natives nor were they molested by wild beasts.
Their journey was a miracle of ease.

Tarzan asked questions and learned rapidly.  D'Arnot taught him many of
the refinements of civilization--even to the use of knife and fork; but
sometimes Tarzan would drop them in disgust and grasp his food in his
strong brown hands, tearing it with his molars like a wild beast.

Then D'Arnot would expostulate with him, saying:

"You must not eat like a brute, Tarzan, while I am trying to make a
gentleman of you.  MON DIEU!  Gentlemen do not thus--it is terrible."

Tarzan would grin sheepishly and pick up his knife and fork again, but
at heart he hated them.

On the journey he told D'Arnot about the great chest he had seen the
sailors bury; of how he had dug it up and carried it to the gathering
place of the apes and buried it there.

"It must be the treasure chest of Professor Porter," said D'Arnot.  "It
is too bad, but of course you did not know."

Then Tarzan recalled the letter written by Jane to her friend--the one
he had stolen when they first came to his cabin, and now he knew what
was in the chest and what it meant to Jane.

"To-morrow we shall go back after it," he announced to D'Arnot.

"Go back?" exclaimed D'Arnot.  "But, my dear fellow, we have now been
three weeks upon the march.  It would require three more to return to
the treasure, and then, with that enormous weight which required, you
say, four sailors to carry, it would be months before we had again
reached this spot."

"It must be done, my friend," insisted Tarzan.  "You may go on toward
civilization, and I will return for the treasure.  I can go very much
faster alone."

"I have a better plan, Tarzan," exclaimed D'Arnot.  "We shall go on
together to the nearest settlement, and there we will charter a boat
and sail back down the coast for the treasure and so transport it
easily.  That will be safer and quicker and also not require us to be
separated.  What do you think of that plan?"

"Very well," said Tarzan.  "The treasure will be there whenever we go
for it; and while I could fetch it now, and catch up with you in a moon
or two, I shall feel safer for you to know that you are not alone on
the trail.  When I see how helpless you are, D'Arnot, I often wonder
how the human race has escaped annihilation all these ages which you
tell me about.  Why, Sabor, single handed, could exterminate a thousand
of you."

D'Arnot laughed.

"You will think more highly of your genus when you have seen its armies
and navies, its great cities, and its mighty engineering works.  Then
you will realize that it is mind, and not muscle, that makes the human
animal greater than the mighty beasts of your jungle.

"Alone and unarmed, a single man is no match for any of the larger
beasts; but if ten men were together, they would combine their wits and
their muscles against their savage enemies, while the beasts, being
unable to reason, would never think of combining against the men.
Otherwise, Tarzan of the Apes, how long would you have lasted in the
savage wilderness?"

"You are right, D'Arnot," replied Tarzan, "for if Kerchak had come to
Tublat's aid that night at the Dum-Dum, there would have been an end of
me.  But Kerchak could never think far enough ahead to take advantage
of any such opportunity.  Even Kala, my mother, could never plan ahead.
She simply ate what she needed when she needed it, and if the supply
was very scarce, even though she found plenty for several meals, she
would never gather any ahead.

"I remember that she used to think it very silly of me to burden myself
with extra food upon the march, though she was quite glad to eat it
with me, if the way chanced to be barren of sustenance."

"Then you knew your mother, Tarzan?" asked D'Arnot, in surprise.

"Yes.  She was a great, fine ape, larger than I, and weighing twice as
much."

"And your father?" asked D'Arnot.

"I did not know him.  Kala told me he was a white ape, and hairless
like myself.  I know now that he must have been a white man."

D'Arnot looked long and earnestly at his companion.

"Tarzan," he said at length, "it is impossible that the ape, Kala, was
your mother.  If such a thing can be, which I doubt, you would have
inherited some of the characteristics of the ape, but you have not--you
are pure man, and, I should say, the offspring of highly bred and
intelligent parents.  Have you not the slightest clue to your past?"

"Not the slightest," replied Tarzan.

"No writings in the cabin that might have told something of the lives
of its original inmates?"

"I have read everything that was in the cabin with the exception of one
book which I know now to be written in a language other than English.
Possibly you can read it."

Tarzan fished the little black diary from the bottom of his quiver, and
handed it to his companion.

D'Arnot glanced at the title page.

"It is the diary of John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, an English nobleman,
and it is written in French," he said.

Then he proceeded to read the diary that had been written over twenty
years before, and which recorded the details of the story which we
already know--the story of adventure, hardships and sorrow of John
Clayton and his wife Alice, from the day they left England until an
hour before he was struck down by Kerchak.

D'Arnot read aloud.  At times his voice broke, and he was forced to
stop reading for the pitiful hopelessness that spoke between the lines.

Occasionally he glanced at Tarzan; but the ape-man sat upon his
haunches, like a carven image, his eyes fixed upon the ground.

Only when the little babe was mentioned did the tone of the diary alter
from the habitual note of despair which had crept into it by degrees
after the first two months upon the shore.

Then the passages were tinged with a subdued happiness that was even
sadder than the rest.

One entry showed an almost hopeful spirit.

To-day our little boy is six months old.  He is sitting in Alice's lap
beside the table where I am writing--a happy, healthy, perfect child.

Somehow, even against all reason, I seem to see him a grown man, taking
his father's place in the world--the second John Clayton--and bringing
added honors to the house of Greystoke.

There--as though to give my prophecy the weight of his endorsement--he
has grabbed my pen in his chubby fists and with his inkbegrimed little
fingers has placed the seal of his tiny finger prints upon the page.


And there, on the margin of the page, were the partially blurred
imprints of four wee fingers and the outer half of the thumb.

When D'Arnot had finished the diary the two men sat in silence for some
minutes.

"Well!  Tarzan of the Apes, what think you?" asked D'Arnot.  "Does not
this little book clear up the mystery of your parentage?

"Why man, you are Lord Greystoke."

"The book speaks of but one child," he replied.  "Its little skeleton
lay in the crib, where it died crying for nourishment, from the first
time I entered the cabin until Professor Porter's party buried it, with
its father and mother, beside the cabin.

"No, that was the babe the book speaks of--and the mystery of my origin
is deeper than before, for I have thought much of late of the
possibility of that cabin having been my birthplace.  I am afraid that
Kala spoke the truth," he concluded sadly.

D'Arnot shook his head.  He was unconvinced, and in his mind had sprung
the determination to prove the correctness of his theory, for he had
discovered the key which alone could unlock the mystery, or consign it
forever to the realms of the unfathomable.

A week later the two men came suddenly upon a clearing in the forest.

In the distance were several buildings surrounded by a strong palisade.
Between them and the enclosure stretched a cultivated field in which a
number of negroes were working.

The two halted at the edge of the jungle.

Tarzan fitted his bow with a poisoned arrow, but D'Arnot placed a hand
upon his arm.

"What would you do, Tarzan?" he asked.

"They will try to kill us if they see us," replied Tarzan.  "I prefer
to be the killer."

"Maybe they are friends," suggested D'Arnot.

"They are black," was Tarzan's only reply.

And again he drew back his shaft.

"You must not, Tarzan!" cried D'Arnot.  "White men do not kill
wantonly.  MON DIEU! but you have much to learn.

"I pity the ruffian who crosses you, my wild man, when I take you to
Paris.  I will have my hands full keeping your neck from beneath the
guillotine."

Tarzan lowered his bow and smiled.

"I do not know why I should kill the blacks back there in my jungle,
yet not kill them here.  Suppose Numa, the lion, should spring out upon
us, I should say, then, I presume: Good morning, Monsieur Numa, how is
Madame Numa; eh?"

"Wait until the blacks spring upon you," replied D'Arnot, "then you may
kill them.  Do not assume that men are your enemies until they prove
it."

"Come," said Tarzan, "let us go and present ourselves to be killed,"
and he started straight across the field, his head high held and the
tropical sun beating upon his smooth, brown skin.

Behind him came D'Arnot, clothed in some garments which had been
discarded at the cabin by Clayton when the officers of the French
cruiser had fitted him out in more presentable fashion.

Presently one of the blacks looked up, and beholding Tarzan, turned,
shrieking, toward the palisade.

In an instant the air was filled with cries of terror from the fleeing
gardeners, but before any had reached the palisade a white man emerged
from the enclosure, rifle in hand, to discover the cause of the
commotion.

What he saw brought his rifle to his shoulder, and Tarzan of the Apes
would have felt cold lead once again had not D'Arnot cried loudly to
the man with the leveled gun:

"Do not fire!  We are friends!"

"Halt, then!" was the reply.

"Stop, Tarzan!" cried D'Arnot.  "He thinks we are enemies."

Tarzan dropped into a walk, and together he and D'Arnot advanced toward
the white man by the gate.

The latter eyed them in puzzled bewilderment.

"What manner of men are you?" he asked, in French.

"White men," replied D'Arnot.  "We have been lost in the jungle for a
long time."

The man had lowered his rifle and now advanced with outstretched hand.

"I am Father Constantine of the French Mission here," he said, "and I
am glad to welcome you."

"This is Monsieur Tarzan, Father Constantine," replied D'Arnot,
indicating the ape-man; and as the priest extended his hand to Tarzan,
D'Arnot added: "and I am Paul D'Arnot, of the French Navy."

Father Constantine took the hand which Tarzan extended in imitation of
the priest's act, while the latter took in the superb physique and
handsome face in one quick, keen glance.

And thus came Tarzan of the Apes to the first outpost of civilization.

For a week they remained there, and the ape-man, keenly observant,
learned much of the ways of men; meanwhile black women sewed white duck
garments for himself and D'Arnot so that they might continue their
journey properly clothed.




Chapter XXVI

The Height of Civilization


Another month brought them to a little group of buildings at the mouth
of a wide river, and there Tarzan saw many boats, and was filled with
the timidity of the wild thing by the sight of many men.

Gradually he became accustomed to the strange noises and the odd ways
of civilization, so that presently none might know that two short
months before, this handsome Frenchman in immaculate white ducks, who
laughed and chatted with the gayest of them, had been swinging naked
through primeval forests to pounce upon some unwary victim, which, raw,
was to fill his savage belly.

The knife and fork, so contemptuously flung aside a month before,
Tarzan now manipulated as exquisitely as did the polished D'Arnot.

So apt a pupil had he been that the young Frenchman had labored
assiduously to make of Tarzan of the Apes a polished gentleman in so
far as nicety of manners and speech were concerned.

"God made you a gentleman at heart, my friend," D'Arnot had said; "but
we want His works to show upon the exterior also."

As soon as they had reached the little port, D'Arnot had cabled his
government of his safety, and requested a three-months' leave, which
had been granted.

He had also cabled his bankers for funds, and the enforced wait of a
month, under which both chafed, was due to their inability to charter a
vessel for the return to Tarzan's jungle after the treasure.

During their stay at the coast town "Monsieur Tarzan" became the wonder
of both whites and blacks because of several occurrences which to
Tarzan seemed the merest of nothings.

Once a huge black, crazed by drink, had run amuck and terrorized the
town, until his evil star had led him to where the black-haired French
giant lolled upon the veranda of the hotel.

Mounting the broad steps, with brandished knife, the Negro made
straight for a party of four men sitting at a table sipping the
inevitable absinthe.

Shouting in alarm, the four took to their heels, and then the black
spied Tarzan.

With a roar he charged the ape-man, while half a hundred heads peered
from sheltering windows and doorways to witness the butchering of the
poor Frenchman by the giant black.

Tarzan met the rush with the fighting smile that the joy of battle
always brought to his lips.

As the Negro closed upon him, steel muscles gripped the black wrist of
the uplifted knife-hand, and a single swift wrench left the hand
dangling below a broken bone.

With the pain and surprise, the madness left the black man, and as
Tarzan dropped back into his chair the fellow turned, crying with
agony, and dashed wildly toward the native village.

On another occasion as Tarzan and D'Arnot sat at dinner with a number
of other whites, the talk fell upon lions and lion hunting.

Opinion was divided as to the bravery of the king of beasts--some
maintaining that he was an arrant coward, but all agreeing that it was
with a feeling of greater security that they gripped their express
rifles when the monarch of the jungle roared about a camp at night.

D'Arnot and Tarzan had agreed that his past be kept secret, and so none
other than the French officer knew of the ape-man's familiarity with
the beasts of the jungle.

"Monsieur Tarzan has not expressed himself," said one of the party.  "A
man of his prowess who has spent some time in Africa, as I understand
Monsieur Tarzan has, must have had experiences with lions--yes?"

"Some," replied Tarzan, dryly.  "Enough to know that each of you are
right in your judgment of the characteristics of the lions--you have
met.  But one might as well judge all blacks by the fellow who ran
amuck last week, or decide that all whites are cowards because one has
met a cowardly white.

"There is as much individuality among the lower orders, gentlemen, as
there is among ourselves.  Today we may go out and stumble upon a lion
which is over-timid--he runs away from us.  To-morrow we may meet his
uncle or his twin brother, and our friends wonder why we do not return
from the jungle.  For myself, I always assume that a lion is ferocious,
and so I am never caught off my guard."

"There would be little pleasure in hunting," retorted the first
speaker, "if one is afraid of the thing he hunts."

D'Arnot smiled.  Tarzan afraid!

"I do not exactly understand what you mean by fear," said Tarzan.
"Like lions, fear is a different thing in different men, but to me the
only pleasure in the hunt is the knowledge that the hunted thing has
power to harm me as much as I have to harm him.  If I went out with a
couple of rifles and a gun bearer, and twenty or thirty beaters, to
hunt a lion, I should not feel that the lion had much chance, and so
the pleasure of the hunt would be lessened in proportion to the
increased safety which I felt."

"Then I am to take it that Monsieur Tarzan would prefer to go naked
into the jungle, armed only with a jackknife, to kill the king of
beasts," laughed the other, good naturedly, but with the merest touch
of sarcasm in his tone.

"And a piece of rope," added Tarzan.

Just then the deep roar of a lion sounded from the distant jungle, as
though to challenge whoever dared enter the lists with him.

"There is your opportunity, Monsieur Tarzan," bantered the Frenchman.

"I am not hungry," said Tarzan simply.

The men laughed, all but D'Arnot.  He alone knew that a savage beast
had spoken its simple reason through the lips of the ape-man.

"But you are afraid, just as any of us would be, to go out there naked,
armed only with a knife and a piece of rope," said the banterer.  "Is
it not so?"

"No," replied Tarzan.  "Only a fool performs any act without reason."

"Five thousand francs is a reason," said the other.  "I wager you that
amount you cannot bring back a lion from the jungle under the
conditions we have named--naked and armed only with a knife and a piece
of rope."

Tarzan glanced toward D'Arnot and nodded his head.

"Make it ten thousand," said D'Arnot.

"Done," replied the other.

Tarzan arose.

"I shall have to leave my clothes at the edge of the settlement, so
that if I do not return before daylight I shall have something to wear
through the streets."

"You are not going now," exclaimed the wagerer--"at night?"

"Why not?" asked Tarzan.  "Numa walks abroad at night--it will be
easier to find him."

"No," said the other, "I do not want your blood upon my hands.  It will
be foolhardy enough if you go forth by day."

"I shall go now," replied Tarzan, and went to his room for his knife
and rope.

The men accompanied him to the edge of the jungle, where he left his
clothes in a small storehouse.

But when he would have entered the blackness of the undergrowth they
tried to dissuade him; and the wagerer was most insistent of all that
he abandon his foolhardy venture.

"I will accede that you have won," he said, "and the ten thousand
francs are yours if you will but give up this foolish attempt, which
can only end in your death."

Tarzan laughed, and in another moment the jungle had swallowed him.

The men stood silent for some moments and then slowly turned and walked
back to the hotel veranda.

Tarzan had no sooner entered the jungle than he took to the trees, and
it was with a feeling of exultant freedom that he swung once more
through the forest branches.

This was life!  Ah, how he loved it!  Civilization held nothing like
this in its narrow and circumscribed sphere, hemmed in by restrictions
and conventionalities.  Even clothes were a hindrance and a nuisance.

At last he was free.  He had not realized what a prisoner he had been.

How easy it would be to circle back to the coast, and then make toward
the south and his own jungle and cabin.

Now he caught the scent of Numa, for he was traveling up wind.
Presently his quick ears detected the familiar sound of padded feet and
the brushing of a huge, fur-clad body through the undergrowth.

Tarzan came quietly above the unsuspecting beast and silently stalked
him until he came into a little patch of moonlight.

Then the quick noose settled and tightened about the tawny throat, and,
as he had done it a hundred times in the past, Tarzan made fast the end
to a strong branch and, while the beast fought and clawed for freedom,
dropped to the ground behind him, and leaping upon the great back,
plunged his long thin blade a dozen times into the fierce heart.

Then with his foot upon the carcass of Numa, he raised his voice in the
awesome victory cry of his savage tribe.

For a moment Tarzan stood irresolute, swayed by conflicting emotions of
loyalty to D'Arnot and a mighty lust for the freedom of his own jungle.
At last the vision of a beautiful face, and the memory of warm lips
crushed to his dissolved the fascinating picture he had been drawing of
his old life.

The ape-man threw the warm carcass of Numa across his shoulders and
took to the trees once more.

The men upon the veranda had sat for an hour, almost in silence.

They had tried ineffectually to converse on various subjects, and
always the thing uppermost in the mind of each had caused the
conversation to lapse.

"MON DIEU," said the wagerer at length, "I can endure it no longer.  I
am going into the jungle with my express and bring back that mad man."

"I will go with you," said one.

"And I"--"And I"--"And I," chorused the others.

As though the suggestion had broken the spell of some horrid nightmare
they hastened to their various quarters, and presently were headed
toward the jungle--each one heavily armed.

"God!  What was that?" suddenly cried one of the party, an Englishman,
as Tarzan's savage cry came faintly to their ears.

"I heard the same thing once before," said a Belgian, "when I was in
the gorilla country.  My carriers said it was the cry of a great bull
ape who has made a kill."

D'Arnot remembered Clayton's description of the awful roar with which
Tarzan had announced his kills, and he half smiled in spite of the
horror which filled him to think that the uncanny sound could have
issued from a human throat--from the lips of his friend.

As the party stood finally near the edge of the jungle, debating as to
the best distribution of their forces, they were startled by a low
laugh near them, and turning, beheld advancing toward them a giant
figure bearing a dead lion upon its broad shoulders.

Even D'Arnot was thunderstruck, for it seemed impossible that the man
could have so quickly dispatched a lion with the pitiful weapons he had
taken, or that alone he could have borne the huge carcass through the
tangled jungle.

The men crowded about Tarzan with many questions, but his only answer
was a laughing depreciation of his feat.

To Tarzan it was as though one should eulogize a butcher for his
heroism in killing a cow, for Tarzan had killed so often for food and
for self-preservation that the act seemed anything but remarkable to
him.  But he was indeed a hero in the eyes of these men--men accustomed
to hunting big game.

Incidentally, he had won ten thousand francs, for D'Arnot insisted that
he keep it all.

This was a very important item to Tarzan, who was just commencing to
realize the power which lay beyond the little pieces of metal and paper
which always changed hands when human beings rode, or ate, or slept, or
clothed themselves, or drank, or worked, or played, or sheltered
themselves from the rain or cold or sun.

It had become evident to Tarzan that without money one must die.
D'Arnot had told him not to worry, since he had more than enough for
both, but the ape-man was learning many things and one of them was that
people looked down upon one who accepted money from another without
giving something of equal value in exchange.

Shortly after the episode of the lion hunt, D'Arnot succeeded in
chartering an ancient tub for the coastwise trip to Tarzan's
land-locked harbor.

It was a happy morning for them both when the little vessel weighed
anchor and made for the open sea.

The trip to the beach was uneventful, and the morning after they
dropped anchor before the cabin, Tarzan, garbed once more in his jungle
regalia and carrying a spade, set out alone for the amphitheater of the
apes where lay the treasure.

Late the next day he returned, bearing the great chest upon his
shoulder, and at sunrise the little vessel worked through the harbor's
mouth and took up her northward journey.

Three weeks later Tarzan and D'Arnot were passengers on board a French
steamer bound for Lyons, and after a few days in that city D'Arnot took
Tarzan to Paris.

The ape-man was anxious to proceed to America, but D'Arnot insisted
that he must accompany him to Paris first, nor would he divulge the
nature of the urgent necessity upon which he based his demand.

One of the first things which D'Arnot accomplished after their arrival
was to arrange to visit a high official of the police department, an
old friend; and to take Tarzan with him.

Adroitly D'Arnot led the conversation from point to point until the
policeman had explained to the interested Tarzan many of the methods in
vogue for apprehending and identifying criminals.

Not the least interesting to Tarzan was the part played by finger
prints in this fascinating science.

"But of what value are these imprints," asked Tarzan, "when, after a
few years the lines upon the fingers are entirely changed by the
wearing out of the old tissue and the growth of new?"

"The lines never change," replied the official.  "From infancy to
senility the fingerprints of an individual change only in size, except
as injuries alter the loops and whorls.  But if imprints have been
taken of the thumb and four fingers of both hands one must needs lose
all entirely to escape identification."

"It is marvelous," exclaimed D'Arnot.  "I wonder what the lines upon my
own fingers may resemble."

"We can soon see," replied the police officer, and ringing a bell he
summoned an assistant to whom he issued a few directions.

The man left the room, but presently returned with a little hardwood
box which he placed on his superior's desk.

"Now," said the officer, "you shall have your fingerprints in a second."

He drew from the little case a square of plate glass, a little tube of
thick ink, a rubber roller, and a few snowy white cards.

Squeezing a drop of ink onto the glass, he spread it back and forth
with the rubber roller until the entire surface of the glass was
covered to his satisfaction with a very thin and uniform layer of ink.

"Place the four fingers of your right hand upon the glass, thus," he
said to D'Arnot.  "Now the thumb.  That is right.  Now place them in
